VU Research Portal Genetic correlates of social stratification in Great Britain Abdellaoui, Abdel; Hugh-Jones, David; Yengo, Loic; Kemper, Kathryn E; Nivard, Michel G; Veul, Laura; Holtz, Yan; Zietsch, Brendan P; Frayling, Timothy M; Wray, Naomi R; Yang, Jian; Verweij, Karin J H; Visscher, Peter M published in Nature Human Behaviour 2019 DOI (link to publisher) 10.1038/s41562-019-0757-5 document version Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record document license Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act Link to publication in VU Research Portal citation for published version (APA) Abdellaoui, A., Hugh-Jones, D., Yengo, L., Kemper, K. E., Nivard, M. G., Veul, L., Holtz, Y., Zietsch, B. P., Frayling, T. M., Wray, N. R., Yang, J., Verweij, K. J. H., & Visscher, P. M. (2019). Genetic correlates of social stratification in Great Britain. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(12), 1332-1342. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019- 0757-5 General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
             • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain             • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal 
Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
E-mail address: vuresearchportal.ub@vu.nl Download date: 16. Sep. 2025 
Articles https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0757-5 1 Department of Psychiatry, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.  2 Department of Economics, University of East  Anglia, Norwich, UK.  3 Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.  4 Department of Biological Psychology, VU  University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.  5 School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.  6 Genetics of Complex  Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.  7 Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,  Australia. *e-mail: a.abdellaoui@amsterdamumc.nl; peter.visscher@uq.edu.au T he  first  law  of  geography  states  that  “everything  is  related  to   everything  else,  but  near  things  are  more  related  than  distant   things” 1
.  Humans  living  near  each  other  tend  to  share  more   ancestry  with  each  other  than  with  humans  who  live  further  away,   which is reflected in genome-wide patterns of genetic variation on a  global scale 2  and on finer scales 3–5
. Regional differences in allele fre- quencies are driven by genetic drift (that is, the random fluctuations  of  allele  frequencies  in  each  generation),  natural  selection  pressures,   migrations or admixture (that is, two previously isolated populations  interbreeding). Out of these four mechanisms, genetic drift is the only  mechanism not expected to disproportionately affect genetic variants  that are associated with heritable human traits. Natural selection tar - gets  heritable  traits  over  extended  periods  of  time,  thereby  affecting   allele  frequencies  of  the  genetic  variants  that  are  associated  with  the   traits under selection. Earlier studies have identified natural selection  pressures  on  many  trait-associated  variants  by  looking  for  extreme   allele frequency differences between different ancestries 3,6,7
. Migration  is a behaviour, and since most behavioural traits have heritable com - ponents 8 ,  migration  is  likely  to  be  associated  with  genetic  variants   that influence behaviour. Long-distance migratory events may in turn  result  in  admixture.  Internal  migrations  (that  is,  migrations  within   countries) may lead to geographic clustering of trait-associated genetic  variants beyond the clustering of ancestry, and may occur for a variety  of reasons. They may be driven by the search for specific neighbour - hood,  housing  and  inhabitant  characteristics,  and/or  socioeconomic   factors 9 ,  such  as  the  mass  migrations  from  rural  to  industrial  areas   during  industrialization 10
.  These  geographic  movements  may  coin- cide with the regional clustering of a range of heritable outcomes such  as socioeconomic status (SES), health and cultural outcomes 11–14
.
Understanding   what   drives   the   geographic   distribution   of    genome-wide  complex  trait  variation  is  important  for  a  variety  of   reasons.  Studying  regional  differences  of  genetic  variants  associ - ated  with  education,  wealth,  growth,  health  and  disease  may  help   explain  why  these  traits  are  unevenly  distributed  across  a  country.   Besides the known regional differences in income and SES, signifi - cant regional differences have been reported for mental 14  and physi- cal 13  health problems. Regional differences in wealth and health are  probably linked to each other 15–17  and have been shown to be partly  driven  by  migration 13,18
.  If  genome-wide  complex  trait  variation  is   geographically  clustered,  this  should  be  taken  into  account  in  cer - tain  genetically  informative  study  designs.  Mendelian  randomiza- tion,  for  example,  uses  genetic  variants  as  instrumental  variables   to identify causality, under the assumption that the genetic instru - ment  is  not  associated  with  confounders  that  influence  the  two   traits  under  investigation 19
.  Geographic  clustering  of  genetic  com- plex trait variation could introduce gene–environment correlations  that violate this assumption 20
. Such gene–environment correlations  could also introduce bias in heritability estimates in twin and fam - ily studies 21 , and could affect signals from genome-wide association  studies (GWASs).
Here, we investigate whether genome-wide complex trait varia - tion in Great Britain is geographically clustered after accounting for  ancestry differences; if so, this may reflect the genetic consequences  of more recent (internal) migration events. We then investigate the  role of migration in the geographic clustering of genome-wide com - plex trait variation. Finally, we examine whether genome-wide com- plex trait variation and its geographic clustering are associated with  regional SES, health and cultural outcomes.
Genetic correlates of social stratification   in Great Britain Abdel Abdellaoui   1 *, David Hugh-Jones 2 , Loic Yengo   3 , Kathryn E. Kemper   3 , Michel G. Nivard   4 ,  Laura Veul 1 , Yan Holtz 3 , Brendan P. Zietsch   5 , Timothy M. Frayling 6 , Naomi R. Wray   3,7 ,  Jian Yang    3,7 , Karin J. H. Verweij 1  and Peter M. Visscher   3,7 * Human  DNA  polymorphisms  vary  across  geographic  regions,  with  the  most  commonly  observed  variation  reflecting  dis- tant ancestry differences. Here we investigate the geographic clustering of common genetic variants that influence complex  traits in a sample of ~450,000 individuals from Great Britain. Of 33 traits analysed, 21 showed significant geographic clus- tering at the genetic level after controlling for ancestry, probably reflecting migration driven by socioeconomic status (SES).  Alleles  associated  with  educational  attainment  (EA)  showed  the  most  clustering,  with  EA-decreasing  alleles  clustering  in   lower SES areas such as coal mining areas. Individuals who leave coal mining areas carry more EA-increasing alleles on aver- age than those in the rest of Great Britain. The level of geographic clustering is correlated with genetic associations between  complex traits and regional measures of SES, health and cultural outcomes. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis  that social stratification leaves visible marks in geographic arrangements of common allele frequencies and gene–environ- ment correlations.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1332 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Results Data and analysis. We investigated geographic clustering of ances- try  and  complex  trait  variation  using  phenotypic  measurements   and   genome-wide   single-nucleotide   polymorphism   (SNP)   data    from  ~450,000  British  individuals  of  European  ancestry  from  UK   Biobank 22
. Ancestry within Great Britain was captured by conduct- ing a principal component analysis (PCA) 23  on genome-wide com- mon SNPs—a method that has been shown to successfully capture  ancestry  differences  within  relatively  homogeneous  populations 3
.  Genome-wide  complex  trait  variation  was  captured  by  polygenic   scores, which are created by weighting an individual’s alleles by the  estimated  allelic  effects  on  the  trait  of  interest  and  then  summing   the  weights,  resulting  in  predictive  scores  for  each  individual.  We   built polygenic scores for 456,426 individuals from 1,312,100 auto - somal  SNPs  using  effect  estimates  from  33  published  GWASs  on   traits related to psychiatric disease, substance use, personality, body  composition,  cardiovascular  disease,  diabetes,  reproduction  and   educational attainment (EA) (Supplementary Table 1). Importantly,  the  33  GWASs  that  produced  the  effect  estimates  did  not,  to  our   knowledge,  include  UK  Biobank  participants 24
.  We  included  five   heritable  phenotypic  outcomes;  namely,  EA,  height,  body  mass   index  (BMI),  body  fat  and  overall  health.  Geographic  clustering   of  principal  components  (PCs),  phenotypes  and  polygenic  scores   was  then  investigated  in  320,940  unrelated  individuals  and  their     birthplace by testing whether their spatial autocorrelation (Moran’s I)   was  significantly  greater  than  zero.  The  spatial  autocorrelation    (Moran’s I)  is  the  correlation  in  a  measure  among  nearby  loca- tions  in  space,  and  its  values  range  between  −1  (dispersed)  and  1   (spatially  clustered),  where  0  = spatially  random 25
.  Supplementary   Fig. 1 shows the geographic locations of UK Biobank participants.  Furthermore,  we  tested  whether  phenotypes  and  polygenic  scores   that showed significant geographic clustering were associated with  migration  into  or  out  of  the  most  economically  deprived  regions   (coal  mining  areas).  Finally,  we  examined  whether  the  complex   traits and their geographic clustering were associated with regional  measures of SES, health and cultural outcomes.
Geographic clustering of ancestry and complex trait variation. In  line  with  earlier  studies 5 ,  British  ancestry  showed  significant  geo- graphic clustering: the first 100 genetic PCs all showed Moran’s I val- ues that were >0, with 72 PCs showing an empirical P < 0.0005  (the  Bonferroni-corrected threshold) and 95 PCs showing an empirical  P <   0.05, with the top PCs generally having higher Moran’s I values  (Fig. 1 shows the first five PCs; https://holtzyan.shinyapps.io/UKB_ geo/  shows  maps  of  all  100  PCs).  The  geographic  distributions  of   the ancestry differences captured by the PCs probably reflect histor - ical demographic events 5
. These include old population movements  and settlements, followed by generations of relatively isolated (sub) populations  that  went  through  genome-wide  allele  frequency  dif - ferentiation through genetic drift and, perhaps, differential natural  selection pressures.
Both before and after correcting for 100 PCs, the phenotypes all  showed  significant  Moran’s  I  values  (0.61  for  EA,  0.63  for  height,   0.51 for BMI, 0.61 for body fat and 0.52 for overall health (all empir - ical P values < 10 −4 ; Fig. 2 and Supplementary Figs. 2 and 4)). In par- ticular,  EA,  body  fat,  BMI  and  overall  health  showed  considerable   clustering  in  coal  mining  areas  (Supplementary  Fig.  2),  as  further   discussed below. Without controlling for ancestry, 30 out of the 33  polygenic  scores  tested  showed  significant  geographic  clustering,   with  geographic  distributions  similar  to  ancestry  differences  cap - tured  by  the  PCs  (Supplementary  Fig.  3;  see  https://holtzyan.shin- yapps.io/UKB_geo/  for  maps  of  all  of  the  polygenic  scores).  After   regressing out 100 PCs, 21 polygenic scores remained significantly  geographically  clustered,  with  EA  polygenic  scores  showing  the   highest  Moran’s  I  values,  and  geographic  distributions  similar  to   the phenotypic EA outcome. We included two EA polygenic scores  based on two similar-sized GWASs: one excluding UK Biobank par - ticipants and 23andMe (n =    217,569), based on the Okbay et al.
26  EA  GWAS (EA2); and one excluding all British cohorts and 23andMe  (n =    245,621), based on the larger Lee et al.
27  EA GWAS (EA3). The  polygenic  score  based  on  the  GWAS  excluding  all  British  cohorts   should be more robust to residual population stratification. The two  EA  polygenic  scores  gave  very  similar  results  (before  PC  correc - tion: Moran’s I = ~0.6;  empirical P values < 10 −4 ; after PC correction:  Moran’s I = ~0.5;  empirical P values < 10 −4  (Figs. 2 and 3)).
The  polygenic  scores  of  the  different  traits  differed  in  their  pre - dictive power due to variation in the trait heritability and due to dif- ferent  discovery  GWAS  sample  sizes.  It  is  expected  that  geographic   clustering is easier to detect when the polygenic score has more pre - dictive  power.  We  computed  the  expected  r 2   value  (i.e.,  proportion   of variance explained) of the polygenic scores with their traits using  h 2 g /(1 + [M/N × h 2 g ]), where h 2 g  is the SNP-based heritability, M is the  equivalent number of independent SNPs after accounting for linkage  disequilibrium, and N is the discovery GWAS sample size (Fig. 2) 28
.   The  correlation  between  Moran’s  I  and  the  expected  r 2   between    the  polygenic  scores  and  their  traits  was  0.14  (calculated  over  33   traits; P =  0.45),  indicating  that  the  differences  we  observed  in  the   estimated geographic clustering of different traits were not driven by  differences in the predictive power of the respective polygenic scores.
It  has  been  argued  that  geographic  clustering  of  genetic  varia - tion  related  to  EA  in  Great  Britain  is  probably  due  to  (subtle)   ancestry differences or ascertainment bias 29
. In the Supplementary  Information,  we  discuss  in  more  detail  why  these  are  unlikely  to   drive  our  observations  (see  the  section  ‘Population  stratification   and ascertainment bias’). Instead, we explored a more likely expla - nation; namely, recent SES-related migrations.
SES-related migration. The geographic clustering of genome-wide  trait-associated alleles after correcting for population stratification  would  be  expected  if  there  were  migration  events  that  occurred   more   recently   than   the   pre-modern   demographic   events   that    drove  the  regional  ancestry  differences  captured  by  the  PCs.  We   investigated  whether  our  observations  were  consistent  with  what   is  expected  from  relatively  recent  internal  migrations  due  to  SES- related factors, which are known to motivate longer-distance moves  especially 30
. SES-related migration would be in line with the rest of  the  traits  being  geographically  clustered  because  they  share  genes   with EA: the genetic correlation between EA and the rest of the traits  was  significantly  associated  with  their  Moran’s  I  values  (r = 0.56;  P = 9.5 × 10 −4 ;  Supplementary  Fig.  5).  We  hypothesized  that  two   types of migration flows may have affected the geographic clustering  of SES-related alleles: (1) labourers and farmers leaving the country - side during the Industrial Revolution to work in the geographically  clustered industrial jobs 10 ; and (2) more recent migration of higher- educated  people,  or  people  seeking  a  higher  education,  out  of  the   more economically deprived industrial regions.
Much  of  the  energy  necessary  for  mass  production  during  the   Industrial Revolution came from coal mines, which attracted large  numbers of manual labourers. The Industrial Revolution and later  deindustrialization had a great impact on the economy of the coal  mining  areas 31
.  The  decline  of  the  British  coal  industry  began  in   the 1920s, and nearly the whole industry has closed since the early  1980s, resulting in major job losses that remained visible in unem - ployment rates decades later 32
. Economic deprivation is widespread  in coal mining areas: 43% of neighbourhoods in coal mining areas  fall into the 30% most economically deprived 31
. In our analysis, coal  mining  areas  showed  more  economic  deprivation  than  the  rest  of   Great  Britain  from  1971–2011,  as  measured  with  the  Townsend   index 33   (all  false  discovery  rate  (FDR)-corrected  P values < 10 −32 ;  Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 6). All regions have become less eco - nomically deprived over time, but the difference between coal min- ing areas and the rest remains highly significant.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1333 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur After  correcting  for  ancestry  differences,  the  Townsend  index   was  significantly  associated  with  all  five  phenotypes  and  all  21   geographically  clustered  polygenic  scores,  with  the  strongest  asso - ciations for EA (Supplementary Figs. 7 and 8). All phenotypes and  21  geographically  clustered  polygenic  scores  showed  significant     differences between coal mining areas and the rest of Great Britain,  based  on  both  birthplace  and  current  address  (Supplementary   Fig. 9), with EA showing the strongest differences (FDR-corrected  P value < 10 −200 ).   We   further   compared   phenotypes   and   ances- try-corrected  polygenic  scores  among  four  groups  of  unrelated    PC1 Moran’s I = 0.77 P < 1 × 10 –4 P < 1 × 10 –4 P < 1 × 10 –4 P < 1 × 10 –4 P < 1 × 10 –4 Moran’s I = 0.83Moran’s I = 0.59Moran’s I = 0.84Moran’s I = 0.93 PC2 2.0 1.5 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.4 4 3 2 1 –1 0 1.0 0.5 0 –0.
5 –1.0 –1.5 0.2 0 –0.2 –0.4 –0.6 0.2 0 –0.2 –0.4 –0.6 0.5 0 –0.5 PC3PC4PC5 Fig. 1 | Geographic distributions (birthplace) of the first five PCs, Moran’s I and empirical P values for Moran’s I. P values denoted in green are significant  after Bonferroni correction (n = 320,940 unrelated individuals). Maps were adapted from 2011 Census aggregate data (UK Data Service (February 2017  edition). Office for National Statistics; National records of Scotland; Northern Ireland Statistics and research Agency (2017); https://doi.org/10.5257/ census/aggregate-2011-2).
Caffeine Cannabis (ever versus never) Anorexia Alzheimer Agreeableness Autism Age at menarche Alcohol use Schizophrenia MDD Extraversion Type 2 diabetes Bipolar Drinks per week Smoking cessation Age at smoking initiation Neuroticism Cigarettes per day Conscientiousness Age at menopause Height Openness Smoking initiation Coronary artery disease Hip circumference ADHD Body fat Waist circumference Waist-to-hip ratio BMI Cognitive ability Educational attainment Educational attainment (no GB) Overall health BMI Height Body fat Educational attainment 00.20.40.6 Moran’s I Phenotypes Polygenic scores No ancestry correction Corrected for 100 PCs Significant (FDR) Not significant (FDR) r 2  = 0.03 r 2  = 0.06 r 2  = 0.09 Phenotype Fig. 2 | Moran’s I of five phenotypes and 33 SBLuP polygenic scores computed using the average polygenic score per region in 378 local authority  regions (n = 320,940 unrelated individuals). Moran’s I values of the polygenic scores unadjusted for PCs (red) and adjusted for 100 PCs (green), where  orange data points represent a significant FDr-corrected P value < 0.05 (corrected for 38 tests). Orange lines between data points represent Moran’s I  values significantly larger than 0, both before and after correcting for 100 PCs. See Supplementary Fig. 4 for the distributions of significant Moran’s I values  from 10,000 permutations that were conducted to obtain the empirical P values for the phenotypes and polygenic scores, respectively. ADHD, attention  deficit hyperactivity disorder; MDD, major depressive disorder; no GB, excluding British cohorts.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1334 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur individuals: (1) people born in coal mining areas who moved away   from coal mining areas (n =    35,024); (2) people born outside of coal   mining areas and still living outside of coal mining areas (n = 129,298);   (3)  people  born  outside  of  coal  mining  areas  who  moved  into   coal  mining  areas  (n =    47,505);  and  (4)  people  born  in  coal  min - ing areas who still live in coal mining areas (n = 111,838).  Analyses  of  variance  (ANOVAs)  for  all  phenotypes  and  21  polygenic  scores   showed  significant  differences  between  the  four  groups,  with  EA   (EA3 (ref.  27 ); no GB) showing the largest and most significant dif- ferences (F 3, 323,661  = 705.9; P < 10 −200 ; Fig. 4). The largest differences  were  between  people  born  in  coal  mining  areas  who  moved  away   and those who remained in the coal mining areas. The people who  moved away had significantly higher EA polygenic scores than all of  the other groups combined (t 44,000  = 19.7; P = 1 × 10 −85 ), while those  who  remained  had  significantly  lower  EA  polygenic  scores  than   all  of  the  other  groups  combined  (t 230,660  = 45.2; P < 10 −200 ).  Similar   differences  were  observed  for  all  of  the  other  geographically  clus - tered  polygenic  scores,  with  more  favourable  outcomes  for  people   leaving coal mining regions (except for bipolar disorder, which had  the  opposite  effect,  consistent  with  its  positive  genetic  correlation   with  EA 26 ).  We  observed  that  the  degree  of  geographic  clustering   of  polygenic  scores  of  the  different  traits  was  significantly  corre - lated  with  the  strength  of  their  associations  with  Townsend,  coal   mining areas and migration groups; the strongest correlations were  between Moran’s I values and the F statistics of the migration group  differences  (r = 0.95  and P = 5 × 10 −11   including  the  two  outlier  EA   polygenic scores; and r = 0.78  and P = 9 × 10 −5  excluding the two EA  polygenic scores (Supplementary Fig. 10)).
The significant difference between coal mining regions and the  rest  of  the  country  in  the  EA  polygenic  score  was  present  across   the entire birth year range of the UK Biobank participants (1936– 1970;  Fig.  5b).  Both  coal  mining  regions  and  the  rest  of  Great   Britain  showed  a  significantly  decreasing  average  EA  polygenic   score  over  time,  with  a  steeper  decrease  in  coal  mining  regions,   especially  after  1945.  The  interaction  between  birth  year  and  coal   region  was  significant  (P = 2 × 10 −7 ),  with  a  slope  three  times  as   large  within  coal  regions  than  outside  of  coal  regions.  The  stan - dardized effect size of birth year outside of coal mining regions was  −0.001 (that is, 0.001 s.d. of the polygenic score decrease per birth  year; P = 6.8 × 10 −6 ). Within coal mining regions, the effect size was  −0.003 (P < 2 × 10 −16 ) across the entire birth year range and −0.004  after  1945  (P < 2 × 10 −16 ).  Across  the  entire  country,  the  effect  of   birth year was −0.002 (P < 2 × 10 −16 ; Fig. 5a). A decrease in the aver- age polygenic score is consistent with the EA polygenic score being  negatively  associated  with  fertility  rate 34
.  It  is  also  consistent  with   year-of-birth-associated  ascertainment  bias,  such  that  the  oldest   participants in the UK Biobank were more selected on traits associ - ated with EA (for example, health and longevity) than the youngest  participants.  The  steeper  decrease  within  the  coal  mining  regions   could  be  due  to  higher  fertility  among  individuals  with  lower  EA     polygenic scores who were over-represented in those regions and/or   the  migration  of  individuals  with  higher  polygenic  scores  out  of    coal mining regions (Fig. 5c). The strength of the interaction effect  (that  is,  whether  the  slope  was  different  within  versus  outside  of   coal regions) was strongly correlated with Moran’s I (including the  EA scores: r = 0.84; P = 8.3 × 10 −10 ; excluding the EA scores: r = 0.59;  P = 5 × 10 −4 ; Supplementary Fig. 11), which may indicate that geo- graphic clustering due to SES-related migration played a role in the  selection pressure, especially on EA being stronger within than out - side  of  coal  regions.  Phenotypic  EA  also  showed  a  consistent  sig- nificant difference between coal mining regions and the rest of the  country over time, but unlike the polygenic scores, phenotypic EA  (years  of  education)  consistently  increased  over  time  (Fig.  5d–f).  This  increased  significantly  faster  in  the  coal  mining  regions  than   in  the  rest  of  the  country,  which  is  the  opposite  one  would  expect   based  on  the  change  of  polygenic  scores  over  time  (within  coal   regions, the increase was 0.15 years of education per year, whereas  outside  of  coal  regions,  the  increase  was  0.13  years  of  education   per  year;  P  value  of  interaction  effect  < 2 × 10 −16 ),  indicating  that    environmental  improvements  may  have  had  a  stronger  effect  on   the  longitudinal  change  in  educational  outcome  than  the  change     in genetic values.
To get a better sense of the scale of regional differences in pheno - types, polygenic scores and PCs, and of how these changed due to  migration, we computed how much of their variation was explained  by  regional  differences  for  both  birthplace  and  current  address   (Extended  Data  Figs.  1  and  2).  Without  correcting  for  PCs,  there   was much variation in how much the regional differences explained  per polygenic score (Extended Data Fig. 1). After removing the sys - tematic ancestry differences that were captured by PCs, the regional  differences  explained  a  minimum  amount  of  variation  in  all  poly - genic scores except for the EA polygenic scores, which were much  EA2 (no UK Biobank)EA3 (no GB)Townsend (1971)Townsend (2011) 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 –0.1 –0.2 0.4 3 2 3 2 1 0 –1 –2 1 0 –1 –2 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 –0.1 –0.2 –0.3 Fig. 3 | Geographic distribution (birthplace) of EA polygenic scores, after regressing out 100 PCs (n = 320,940 unrelated individuals), and Townsend  indices from 1971 and 2011. For EA2 (no UK Biobank), polygenic scores are based on the Okbay et al.
26  EA GWAS, excluding UK Biobank participants  (n = 217,569). For EA3 (no GB), polygenic scores are based on the Lee et al.
26  EA GWAS, excluding all British cohorts (n = 245,621). The black outlined  regions indicate coal mining areas. Maps were adapted from 2011 Census aggregate data (UK Data Service (February 2017 edition). Office for National  Statistics; National records of Scotland; Northern Ireland Statistics and research Agency (2017); https://doi.org/10.5257/census/aggregate-2011-2).  Color bars indicate distribution frequencies, scaled such that each measure has a mean of 0 and s.d of ±1.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1335 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur less  affected  by  controlling  for  PCs.  The  regional  differences  were   greatest for the EA polygenic scores, with ~0.6–2.6% of individual  differences  being  explained  by  regional  differences,  depending   on  how  fine  the  regional  scale  was  (the  finer  the  scale,  the  more   individual  differences  explained)  and  by  whether  the  calculations   were based on the birthplace or the current address (Extended Data  Fig.  2).  For  the  EA  polygenic  scores,  the  regional  differences  were   ~38–72%  greater  for  the  current  address  than  for  birthplace.  The   increase in variation explained by regional differences for the ances - try-corrected  EA  polygenic  scores  (that  is,  the  difference  between   birthplace and current address in percentage variance explained by  region) was greater than the total variance explained by region for  any other ancestry-corrected polygenic score. As would be expected  from recent migration events, ancestry showed the opposite effect:  comparing birthplace with current address, the variance explained  by  region  on  average  decreased  by  37–73%  for  the  first  30  PCs   EA (phenotypic)Body fat (phenotypic)Height (phenotypic)BMI (phenotypic)Overall health (phenotypic) Bipolar Cigarettes per dayNeuroticismAge at smoking initiationSmoking cessationDrinks per week Smoking initiationOpennessHeightAge at menopauseConscientiousness Waist circumferenceBody fatADHDHip circumferenceCoronary artery disease EA3 (no GB)EA2 (no UK Biobank)Cognitive abilityBMIWaist-to-hip ratio −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 Phenotype score (standardized) −0.10 −0.05 0 0.05 0.10 −0.10 −0.05 0 0.05 0.10 −0.10 −0.05 0 0.05 0.10 −0.10 −0.05 0 0.05 0.10 −0.10 −0.05 0 0.05 0.10 Polygenic score (standardized) Moved away from coal field Stayed out of coal field Moved to coal field Stayed in coal field Fig. 4 | Geographically clustered polygenic scores (n = 16; ordered by Moran’s I) for the four migration groups. All polygenic scores are standardized  residuals after regressing out 100 ancestry-informative PCs. ANOVA was conducted for each polygenic score to test the presence of group differences,  which were all significant, with the least significant FDr-corrected P value of 1 × 10 −4  for conscientiousness. Bar heights represent average values, with s.e.  indicated by the error bars. Migration group n values: n = 35,024 (born in coal field area and moved away); n = 129,298 (born outside of coal mining area  and stayed out); n = 47,505 (born outside of coal mining area and moved to coal mining area); and n = 111,838 (born in coal mining area and stayed).
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1336 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur (Extended Data Fig. 3). A similar decrease was observed for many   polygenic scores before correcting for the PCs (Extended Data Fig. 1),   indicating that the geographic clustering of those polygenic scores  was largely due to them capturing older ancestry differences.
Regional  health,  economic  and  cultural  outcomes.  The  geo - graphic   clustering   of   socioeconomic   resources   and   associated    genetic  variants  may  coincide  with  a  range  of  regional  economic,   behavioural  and  health  outcomes,  as  well  as  collective  views  and   attitudes.  We  tested  the  association  between  all  33  ancestry-cor - rected polygenic scores and 33 publicly available regional measures  of economic, health and cultural outcomes that were likely to cor - relate with SES. The 33 regional measures included measures related  to economic outcomes (for example, EA, employment, income and  electricity consumption), nutrition and health (for example, obesity  and diabetes rates, children’s BMI and height, physical exercise, fast  food  outlets  and  fruit/vegetable  consumption)  and  major  ideolo - gies (political preference and religion). There were many significant  associations between polygenic scores and regional health, economic  and  cultural  outcomes,  with  the  EA  polygenic  scores  consistently   outperforming  the  other  polygenic  scores  in  the  strength  of  their   association (Extended Data Figs. 4–7). If the geographic clustering  of polygenic scores is due to SES-related migration, the strength of  the association between the polygenic scores and the regional SES- related  outcomes  should  be  in  line  with  the  geographic  clustering,   which was largely what we observed. For nearly all of the regional  measures, the absolute standardized betas of regression analyses of  polygenic scores and regional outcomes were highly correlated with  the Moran’s I values of the polygenic scores (Supplementary Fig. 12).
The   significant   associations   between   polygenic   scores   and    regional  outcomes  must  be  interpreted  with  great  care  as  they  do   not  necessarily  imply  direct  causal  links  between  genetic  variants   and regional outcomes. They do imply that there are regional out - comes that are directionally associated with trait-associated alleles,  and these associations could in principle be detected by GWAS. We  therefore conducted GWASs on the 33 regional SES, health and cul - tural  outcomes  by  assigning  all  participants  from  the  same  region   the  same  regional  value  as  a  phenotype  (from  hereon,  referred  to   as  regional  GWAS  (RGWAS)).  An  RGWAS  is  expected  to  detect  a   genetic signal (that is, SNP-based heritability) if the regional mea - sure is correlated with systematic regional differences in geographi- cally clustered alleles that are associated with a complex trait beyond  ancestry.  A  similar  approach  has  been  previously  used  to  success - fully  capture  a  genetic  signal  for  household  income  (household   −0.050 1936–19391939–19421942–19451945–19481948–19511951–19541954–19571957–19601960–19631963–19661966–19701936–19391939–19421942–19451945–19481948–19511951–19541954–19571957–19601960–19631963–19661966–19701936–19391939–19421942–19451945–19481948–19511951–19541954–19571957–19601960–19631963–19661966–1970 −0.025 0 abc de f Birth yearBirth yearBirth year 1936–19391939–19421942–19451945–19481948–19511951–19541954–19571957–19601960–19631963–19661966–19701936–19391939–19421942–19451945–19481948–19511951–19541954–19571957–19601960–19631963–19661966–19701936–19391939–19421942–19451945–19481948–19511951–19541954–19571957–19601960–19631963–19661966–1970 Birth yearBirth yearBirth year Polygenic score (EA3; no GB)Polygenic score (EA3; no GB)Polygenic score (EA3; no GB) −0.15 −0.10 −0.05 0 0.05 Born outside of coal region Born in coal region −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 Moved away from coal field Moved to coal field Stayed in coal field Stayed out of coal field 13 14 15 16 EA (ISCED years) EA (ISCED years) EA (ISCED years) 13 14 15 16 17 Born outside of coal region Born in coal region 12 14 16 Moved away from coal field Moved to coal field Stayed in coal field Stayed out of coal field Fig. 5 | Polygenic scores and EA outcomes over time. a–f, Average polygenic scores based on EA3 (Lee et al.
27 ), excluding British cohorts (a–c), and average  phenotypic EA outcomes (d–f) for 11 3-year bins of the entire range of birth years of the UK Biobank participants (n = 320,940 unrelated individuals),  for all unrelated individuals (a and d), split up into whether the participants were born inside or outside of coal mining regions (b and e), and for the  four migration groups (c and f). The polygenic scores are standardized residuals after regressing out 100 ancestry-informative PCs. The phenotypic EA  outcomes are years of education, as analysed in the EA2 26  and EA3 27  GWASs. ISCE, International Standard Classification of Education.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1337 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur phenotype)  and  social  deprivation  (postal  code  phenotype) 35
.  An   RGWAS  would  allow  us  to  quantify  genetic  relationships  between   regional outcomes and a wider range of complex traits using link - age   disequilibrium   score   regression—a   method   that   computes    genetic  correlations  between  GWASs  without  bias  from  ancestry   differences  or  sample  overlap 36
.  Unlike  effect  estimates  from  the   polygenic scores association analyses, the estimates of genetic cor - relations  are  not  dependent  on  the  power  of  the  GWAS;  however,   their  precision  is.  This  allows  a  direct  comparison  between  the   strengths  of  the  genetic  relationships  without  bias  due  to  differ - ent  GWAS  sample  sizes.  RGWASs  were  run  on  the  ~400,000  UK   Biobank participants, corrected for relatedness, age, sex and ances - try  (100  PCs).  The  highest  SNP-based  heritability  estimates  were   observed  for  regional  measures  of  EA  obtained  from  census  data   (h 2 SNP  =   3.3–6.6%, compared with 10% for the individual-level EA3  GWAS; Supplementary Tables 2 and 3), which showed genetic cor - relations  almost  identical  to  the  individual-level  EA3  GWAS  that   excluded all British cohorts, and replicated its genome-wide signifi - cant SNPs (Fig. 6). Nearly all RGWASs showed high genetic correla- tions with socioeconomic outcomes such as EA, IQ, income and age  at first birth (Extended Data Figs. 8–10). The exception was BMI in  4- to 5-year-olds, with a SNP-based heritability of ~0 (in line with  previous  epidemiological  observations  showing  BMI  in  that  age   range to be less associated with regional SES indicators than at older  ages 37  and less influenced by parental EA at the age of 4 years than  at  older  ages 38 ).  We  describe  the  RGWAS  results  in  more  detail  in   the  Supplementary  Information  section  ‘RGWAS  and  genetic  cor - relation  results’.  The  fact  that  RGWASs  on  regional  measures  for   traits such as obesity, diabetes, BMI and height showed much higher  genetic  correlations  with  individual-level  GWASs  of  EA  than  with   individual-level  GWASs  of  diabetes,  BMI  or  height  itself  suggests   that:  (1)  RGWASs  should  not  be  interpreted  as  an  alternative  for   traditional  individual-level  GWASs;  and  (2)  many  of  the  regional   differences in health-related outcomes are not likely to be caused by  differences in genetic variants that are directly causal for the health  outcomes themselves, and are more likely to be due to environmen - tal factors correlated with regional SES and therefore also with the  SES-related genes of inhabitants.
Discussion Understanding the consequences of DNA variation in human pop- ulations  is  of  major  importance  for  medical,  biological,  forensic,   behavioural and anthropological research. Since the advent of DNA  measurement at a sequence level, studies have shown that the geo - graphic  distributions  of  alleles  are  not  random,  and  have  mapped   striking geographic patterns of ancestry 2,3,5,39
. Here, we investigated  geographic  patterns  of  genome-wide  complex  trait  variation  and   show that there are additional levels of geographic clustering beyond  −1.0 −1.0 −0.5 −0.5 0 0 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.0−1.0−0.500.
51.0 Regional EA from census data (local authority level) Individual EA3 (no GB) −1.0 −0.5 0 0.5 1.0 Individual EA3 (no GB) Regional EA from census data (MSOA level) −0.015−0.0050.005 Individual-level EA 0.0100.015 −0.03 −0.01 0.01 0.03 a bc Beta from regional EA (MSOA) Beta from individual EA3 (no GB) P > 0.05 P < 0.001 P < 1 × 10 −8 Fig. 6 | Comparisons between the results of the RGWASs on EA from census data and from an individual-level EA GWAS that excluded British  participants. a, Effect sizes of 33 independent SNPs (r 2  < 0.1 and at least 1 megabase apart) that reached P < 5 × 10 −8  in the rGWAS on census EA (MSOA;  n = 416,061) plotted against their effect sizes from the individual-level EA3 GWAS without British cohorts (n = 245,621). The correlation between the  beta values is 0.94 (P < 2 × 10 −16 ). b,c, Scatterplots of the genetic correlations (r g ) with individual-level GWASs of 45 complex traits. Each dot represents  a complex trait. In b, the correlation between the r g  values from the rGWAS on census EA at the local authority level (n = 402,552) and the individual  EA3 GWAS without British cohorts (n = 245,621) is 0.99. In c, the correlation between the r g  values from the rGWAS on census EA at the MSOA level  (n = 416,061) and the individual EA3 GWAS without British cohorts (n = 245,621) is also 0.99. The red lines in each panel represent y = x.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1338 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur the  geographic  patterns  that  reflect  older  ancestry  differences.  We   show  that  the  geographic  clustering  of  genome-wide  trait-associ - ated alleles is consistent with the hypothesis that regional allele fre- quencies  are  changed  by  recent  geographic  movements  of  people.   We show that the resulting regional genetic patterns are associated  with regional socioeconomic, health and cultural outcomes.
To  build  polygenic  scores,  we  used  the  effects  of  genome-wide   alleles  on  complex  traits  that  were  estimated  in  independent  data - sets that excluded UK Biobank, and in the case of EA, excluded all  data from Great Britain. Without controlling for ancestry, almost all  traits  that  we  examined  showed  significant  geographic  clustering,   often  resembling  the  geographic  patterns  of  ancestry  differences   within  Great  Britain.  This  indicates  that:  (1)  the  allele  frequencies   were  differentiated  between  the  different  ancestries  due  to  genetic   drift or natural selection; and/or (2) the GWASs that produced the  SNP effect estimates did not sufficiently control for ancestry differ - ences,  resulting  in  SNP  effect  estimates  that  were  biased  towards   certain  ancestral  backgrounds.  Recently,  it  was  shown  that  infla - tion  due  to  population  stratification  in  polygenic  scores  may  lead   to  incorrect  inference  about  natural  selection  when  comparing   multiple  ancestries 40,41
.  When  we  control  for  ancestry  differences,   21  polygenic  scores  remain  significantly  clustered  by  geography.   The  strongest  clustering  was  observed  for  EA.  Among  the  rest  of   the  geographically  clustered  traits  were  body  dimensions,  person - ality  dimensions,  substance  use,  and  physical  and  mental  health   traits. There may be independent influences of those traits on non- random migration, but their clustering is likely to be at least partly  driven by their genetic overlap with EA. The increased geographic  clustering  of  EA-associated  alleles  is  consistent  with  the  cluster - ing expected from relatively recent SES-driven migration, as is the  simultaneous  decrease  in  geographic  clustering  of  the  older  geo - graphic  patterns  of  ancestry  (Extended  Data  Figs.  1–3).  A  similar   process was observed in the Dutch population, where the ancestry  of  offspring  of  higher-educated  parents  showed  lower  correlations   with geography than the offspring of less mobile parents with lower  education levels 42
. A recent study in a much smaller US sample also  found EA to geographically cluster more than the other phenotypes  they analysed, but for the polygenic scores they studied, height and  smoking  showed  stronger  geographic  clustering  in  their  sample   than the EA polygenic score 43
. It is not clear whether this discrep- ancy was because of greater sampling error due to a much smaller  sample size (n =   ~8,600) and lower geographic resolution (US state  level), or whether the situation is different in the United States com - pared with Great Britain.
The  degree  of  geographic  clustering  of  the  polygenic  scores  of   different traits was largely in line with the strength of the relation - ship of the traits with regional socioeconomic, health and cultural  outcomes (Supplementary Fig. 12) and with migration out of eco - nomically  deprived  regions  (Supplementary  Fig.  10).  People  are   reportedly more likely to migrate to improve their skills or employ - ment  prospects  than  for  other  area  characteristics 9
.  Many  indus- trialized  countries  showed  these  types  of  migration  flows  during   the  late  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  century,  when  labourers   and  small  farmers  left  the  countryside  to  work  in  industrial  jobs   that  were  often  highly  clustered  in  geographic  space  (for  example,   coal  mining  areas) 12
.  After  deindustrialization,  the  dense,  durable   and affordable working-class houses and public transportation net - works from the industrial revolution remained in these neighbour- hoods  and  continued  to  attract  poorer  immigrants 12
.  Our  results   show that people with a genetic predisposition to higher cognitive  abilities are leaving these regions, probably attracted by better edu - cational or occupational opportunities in other regions. In fact, the  people  who  were  born  in  coal  mining  areas  and  migrated  to  bet - ter neighbourhoods have higher average EA polygenic scores than  people born outside of these regions. These demographic processes  may influence GWAS signals as well, where (EA-related) alleles that  increase  the  chances  of  living  in  the  unhealthy  circumstances  of   lower  SES  neighbourhoods  (for  example,  in  the  presence  of  more   fast food outlets) 44  may become part of the signal of an individual- level GWAS for health-related traits such as BMI or body fat.
Selective  migration  has  led  to  geographic  clustering  of  social   and  economic  needs,  which  can  coincide  with  collective  attitudes   towards  how  communities  should  be  organized  and  governed.   We  successfully  captured  signals  in  our  RGWASs  on  regional  reli - giousness and regional political attitudes, both of which have been  shown to be partly heritable on an individual level 45–50  and to cluster  geographically 11,12
.  From  a  regional  genetic  perspective,  the  elec- tion outcomes can be roughly divided into electorates of lower SES  (Labour  Party,  UKIP,  ‘leave’  votes  for  Brexit  and  non-voters)  and   higher  SES  (Green  Party,  Liberal  Democrats  and  Conservatives),   in line with previous reports on the geographic clustering of politi - cal preference in Great Britain 12,51
. Our findings suggest that previ- ously reported heritability estimates of these traits on an individual  level  could  possibly  contain  genetic  effects  on  traits,  such  as  EA,   that influence which socioeconomic strata and geographic regions  people end up living in. Regional religiousness shows higher genetic  correlations with personality (openness and conscientiousness) and  less with SES and health traits than political preferences do, which  implies additional dimensions of geographic clustering beyond high  versus low SES.
There are several limitations to this study that have to be kept in  mind when interpreting our results. First, there is an ascertainment  bias in the UK Biobank sample, such that participants are healthier  and more educated than the general population 52
. Our comparison  with EA from census data suggests that some of the regional differ - ences  we  report,  such  as  between  coal  regions  and  the  rest  of  the   country (Supplementary Information), might be larger in the gen - eral population, but it is not clear to what extent this ascertainment  bias has affected the composition of the four migration groups that  we  compared.  Second,  while  it  is  unlikely  that  population  stratifi - cation was solely responsible for our observations (Supplementary  Information),   we   acknowledge   that   the   possibility   of   residual    population  stratification  in  our  signal  is  difficult  to  rule  out  com - pletely.  Replication  in  within-family  analyses  could  help  address   this  possibility.  Third,  SNP  effect  sizes  on  EA  have  been  shown  to   have higher estimates in population-based samples compared with  within-family  designs 27,53
.  This  could  be  due  to  indirect  genetic   effects,  gene–environment  correlations  and/or  assortative  mating,   which  have  been  shown  to  exist  for  EA  in  family  studies 27,53,54
.  It   is  likely  that  this  plays  a  role  in  the  regional  associations  that  we   find, but it is not clear to what extent. Finally, we used the RGWAS  approach  to  help  shed  light  on  the  relationship  between  regional   differences  in  genome-wide  complex  trait  variation  and  publicly   available  regional  measures.  It  is  not  yet  clear  how  its  results  are   affected  by  ascertainment  bias  on  both  sides  (in  UK  Biobank  and   the  different  sources  of  the  publicly  available  regional  measures),   or  how,  or  on  what  scale,  the  heritability  and  effect  size  estimates   of the individual SNPs should be interpreted. However, the scale is  not expected to affect the genetic correlation estimates if the scale is  consistent across SNPs (which is confirmed in Fig. 6b,c). Our results  also show that RGWASs should not be considered an alternative for  individual-level GWASs, even though this seems to work exception - ally well for EA. This was probably due to strong geographic clus- tering of EA-associated alleles, which seems to be captured well by  census data on EA.
Our  findings  possibly  reflect  genetic  consequences  of  social   stratification—a key characteristic of human civilizations 55  whereby  society  groups  its  people  into  strata  based  on  SES.  SES  is  gener - ally based on occupation, income and EA, which are influenced by  many  environmental  and  genetic  factors,  and  are  associated  with   a  wide  range  of  physical  and  mental  health  outcomes.  SES  is  not   distributed  randomly  across  geographic  space,  which  can  lead  to   NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1339 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur geographic clustering of alleles that are associated with SES-related  traits such as EA. EA is known for its high levels of assortative mat - ing 56,57 ,  which  may  be  further  induced  by  geographic  clustering.   This  may  exacerbate  social  inequalities  across  generations.  It  is   possible that the combination of recent increases in social mobility  and  an  improved  educational  system  accelerate  this  separation  of   higher and lower genetic predisposition for traits related to cogni - tion,  SES  and  health.  Even  though  the  genetic  effects  we  find  do   not explain all of the observed regional differences, researchers and  social policymakers may want to keep these genetic effects in mind.  For  example,  the  significant  genetic  correlations  between  EA  and   health-related traits may decrease in the presence of stronger social  safety nets geared towards making inhabitants of lower SES regions  live  more  economically  prosperous  and  healthier  lives.  Increasing   the  quality  of  life  in  lower  SES  regions  may  also  help  decrease   migration  out  of  these  regions  by  people  with  genetic  predisposi - tions for higher SES outcomes, and thereby possibly result in a less  geographically stratified society.
Methods Participants. The participants of this study were sourced from UK Biobank 22,58 ,  which has received ethical approval from the National Health Service North  West Centre for Research Ethics Committee (reference: 11/NW/0382). A total of  502,536 participants (273,402 females and 229,134 males) aged between 37 and  73 years were recruited in Great Britain between 2006 and 2010. The participants  were recruited across 22 assessment centres throughout Great Britain to cover a  variety of different settings providing socioeconomic and ethnic heterogeneity and  urban–rural mix. They underwent a wide range of cognitive, health and lifestyle  assessments, provided blood, urine and saliva samples, and will have their health  followed longitudinally.
Genotypes and quality control. A total of 488,377 UK Biobank participants  had their genome-wide single SNPs genotyped on either the UK BiLEVE array  (n =    49,950) or the UK Biobank Axiom Array (n =    438,423). The genotypes were  imputed using the Haplotype Reference Consortium panel as a reference set (pre- imputation quality control and imputation are described in more detail by Bycroft  et al.
58 ). To create polygenic scores, we extracted a set of 1,312,100 autosomal  HapMap 3 SNPs with a minor allele count of >5, an info score of >0.3, Hardy– Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) P value (P HWE ) < 10 −6  and missingness < 0.05.  For  the GWAS, we used 5.8 million SNPs that survived quality control and have a  minor allele frequency of >0.01.
Ancestry and PCA. To capture British ancestry, we first excluded individuals  with non-European ancestry. Ancestry was determined using PCA in GCTA 59
.  The UK Biobank dataset was projected onto the first two PCs from the 2,504  participants of the 1000 Genomes Project 60 , using HapMap 3 SNPs with a minor  allele frequency of >0.01 in both datasets. Next, participants from UK Biobank  were assigned to one of five super-populations from the 1000 Genomes project:  European, African, East Asian, South Asian or admixed. Assignments for  European, African, East Asian and South Asian ancestries were based on a >0.9  posterior probability of belonging to the 1000 Genomes reference cluster, with  the remaining participants classified as admixed. Posterior probabilities were  calculated under a bivariate Gaussian distribution where this approach generalizes  the k-means method to take account of the shape of the reference cluster. We used  a uniform prior and calculated the vectors of means and 2 × 2  variance–covariance  matrices for each super-population. A total of 456,426 subjects were identified to  be of European ancestry.
A PCA was then conducted on individuals of European ancestry to  capture ancestry differences within the British population. To capture ancestry  differences in homogenous populations, genotypes should be pruned for linkage  disequilibrium, and long-range linkage disequilibrium regions should be removed 3
.  The linkage disequilibrium-pruned (r 2  <    0.1) UK Biobank dataset without long- range linkage disequilibrium regions consisted of 137,102 genotyped SNPs. The  PCA to construct British ancestry-informative PCs was conducted on this SNP set  for unrelated individuals using flashPCA version 2 (ref.  61 ). PC SNP loadings were  used to project the complete set of European individuals onto the PCs.
Polygenic scores. Polygenic scores—the genome-wide sum of alleles weighted by  their estimated effect sizes—were computed for 33 traits. The effect size estimates  were obtained from GWASs that were chosen to not have included the UK  Biobank dataset, to avoid overestimation of the genetic predisposition of a trait 24
.  The polygenic scores were computed using the summary-data based best linear  unbiased prediction (SBLUP) approach 56 , which maximizes the predictive power  by creating scores with best linear unbiased predictor properties that account  for linkage disequilibrium between SNPs. As a reference sample for the linkage  disequilibrium, we used a random sample of 10,000 unrelated individuals from UK  Biobank, imputed using the Haplotype Reference Consortium panel 62
. The traits  included psychiatric disorders, substance use, anthropomorphic traits, personality  dimensions, EA, reproduction, cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes.  Supplementary Table 1 lists the 33 traits and the GWASs from which we obtained  the genome-wide effect sizes.
To further investigate the robustness of our results, we also created polygenic  scores using only independent SNPs that were associated with the trait with a  P value < 0.05. The SNPs were clumped using PLINK 63 , using an r 2  threshold of 0.1  and a window of 1 megabase as the physical distance threshold for clumping.
To examine the geographic clustering of polygenic scores beyond the clustering  of ancestry, we created additional sets of polygenic scores that had the first 100  British ancestry-informative PCs regressed out.
Geographic clustering of ancestry, phenotypes and genome-wide complex  trait variation. The geographic clustering of ancestry, phenotypes and genome- wide complex trait variation was investigated by testing whether the spatial  autocorrelation (Moran’s I) is significantly greater than zero for ancestry- informative PCs, polygenic scores and the residuals of polygenic scores after   regressing out 100 ancestry-informative PCs. The spatial autocorrelation (Moran’s I)   is the correlation in a measure among nearby locations in space, and its values  range between −1 (dispersed) and 1 (spatially clustered), where to 0 = spatially  random 25
. Moran’s I’s were computed using the average PCs or polygenic scores  per region based on the birthplace of the subjects (378 regions; Fig. 1), whereby the  regions were defined according to the local authorities division, as provided by the  UK Data Service InFuse database 64
. The empirical P values of Moran’s I statistics  were derived with 10,000 permutations in which the average PCs or polygenic  scores were permuted across regions (Supplementary Fig. 4). To determine  significance, we used an alpha level of 0.05 for FDR-corrected empirical P values,  and all tests were two tailed. Moran’s I was computed using the mc.moran function  from the spdep package in R. Spatial weights were determined using binary  weights (style =    “B” in the nb2listw function from spdep).
To investigate differences between coal mining regions and the rest of the  country, and the role of related migration flows herein, we used t-tests and  ANOVAs (see the section ‘SES-related migration’), whereby statistical significance  was determined using an alpha level of 0.05 for FDR-corrected P values, and all  tests were two tailed. The data distribution was assumed to be normal, but this was  not formally tested due to the large sample size 65
.
Statistical analyses on regional outcomes. We investigated the genetic  relationship between complex traits and publicly available regional outcomes,  whereby all subjects from the same regions had the same regional phenotypic value  assigned. We did this through association tests for the polygenic scores and genetic  correlations for the RGWASs. For both, the significance was determined using an  alpha level of 0.05 for FDR-corrected P values, and all tests were two tailed. The  data distribution was assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested due   to the large sample size 65  (see Supplementary Fig. 13 for the distributions of the   regional phenotypes). The associations with polygenic scores (Extended Data   Figs. 4–7) were done on unrelated individuals and were computed with robust linear   models using M-estimators. For the RGWASs, we ran linear mixed model GWASs  with BOLT-LMM 66  on all participants with European ancestry, which controls for  cryptic relatedness and population stratification by including a genetic relatedness  matrix in the model 67
. Sex and age were included as covariates, as were the first  100 PCs as an additional control for population stratification. The results revealed  a considerable inflation of test statistics that was not due to polygenic effects (this  was captured by the linkage disequilibrium score intercepts (LDSC) 68  shown in  Supplementary Table 2). This was probably due to the fact that participants who  share regional environmental influences (because they come from the same region)  were all assigned the same phenotypic value. We controlled for this inflation  with an LDSC-based genomic control (GC) 68  (that is, we adjusted the s.e. of the  estimated effect sizes as follows:  s:e: GC ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi LDSCintercept ́s:e: 2 p I  (Supplementary  Table 2)).
The regional phenotypes were obtained from the following public resources: •	The borders of a total of 208 coal mining regions were obtained from the Coal  Authority (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/using-coal-mining-information).
•	The regional EA for 342 local districts and 7,195 middle layer super output  areas (MSOA) was measured using the 2011 estimates of the highest qualifica- tion of residents of England who were >16 years old (five levels: level 1 quali- fications; level 2 qualifications; apprenticeship; level 3 qualifications; and level  4 qualifications), obtained from the Nomis database of the Office of National  Statistics (https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/).
•	Regional measures on employment, income, health deprivation and dis- ability, crime, barriers to housing and services, and living environment were  subdomains of the English index of multiple deprivation in 2015 and were  available at the lower layer super output area level, consisting of 32,844 areas  in England. The raw data were downloaded from https://www.gov.uk/govern- ment/statistics/english-indices-of-deprivation-2015.
•	Children’s height and BMI were measured as part of the National Child  Measurement Programme in England at the local authority level. We analysed  NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1340 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur the measurements from the school year 2015–2016 in the reception class  (4–5 years old) and school year 6 (10–11 years old). The regional averages  of height and BMI were calculated from the raw data, after adjusting the  measures for age and sex. The raw data were downloaded from https://digital.
nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/national-child-measure- ment-programme/2015-16-school-year.
•	The obesity, diabetes, physical activity, fruit consumption, vegetable  consumption and suicide measures were obtained from the Public Health  Outcomes Framework, Public Health England (https://fingertips.phe.org.
uk/profile/public-health-outcomes-framework/data#page/0/gid/1000049/ pat/6/par/E12000006/ati/101/are/E07000008). The obesity measure was  defined as the percentage of adults (≥18 years) per local authority region  who were classified as overweight or obese in 2015. The diabetes measure  was defined as the estimated diagnosis rate for people with diabetes aged  ≥17 years in 2015. The fruit/vegetable consumption measures were defined  as the average number of portions of fruit/vegetables consumed daily by  adults in 2015. The suicide measure was defined as the age-standardized  mortality rate from suicide and injury of undetermined intent per 100,000  inhabitants in 2015.
•	The fast food outlets density by local authority was obtained from Public  Health England (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fast-food- outlets-density-by-local-authority-in-england) and was defined as the number  of fast food outlets per 100,000 inhabitants in 2017.
•	The electricity consumption in 2010 by lower layer super output area level was  obtained from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy  (https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/lower-and-middle-super-output- areas-electricity-consumption). Two measures of electricity consumption were  defined as the average ordinary domestic consumption (kWh) and the average  Economy 7 consumption (kWh).
•	The proportions of religious versus non-religious inhabitants in 2011 were  obtained for 7,195 MSOA regions from the Nomis database of the Office of  National Statistics (https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/).
•	The 2016 Brexit referendum results were obtained for 405 local authority dis- tricts from The Electoral Commission (https://www.electoralcommission.org.
uk/find-information-by-subject/elections-and-referendums/past-elections- and-referendums/eu-referendum/electorate-and-count-information).
•	The 1970 general election outcomes were obtained for 630 constituencies from  Political Science Resources (http://www.politicsresources.net/area/uk/ge70/ ge70index.htm). For analyses of 1970 election results, we used the birthplace  of the participants instead of the current address to assign the phenotypic  values.
•	The 2015 general election outcomes were obtained for 633 constituencies from  http://www.data.parliament.uk/dataset/general-election-2015.
All political parties were included from the 1970 and 2015 elections that had a  median proportion of votes > 0.
Linkage disequilibrium score regression. Genetic correlations were computed  using linkage disequilibrium score regression 36  (Extended Data Figs. 8–10) 36
.  The genetic correlation between traits is based on the estimated slope from the  regression of the product of z scores from two GWASs on the linkage disequilibrium  score, and represents the genetic covariation between two traits based on all of  the polygenic effects captured by the included SNPs. The genome-wide linkage  disequilibrium information used by these methods was based on European  populations from the HapMap 3 reference panel 36,68
. All linkage disequilibrium score  regression analyses included the 1,290,028 million genome-wide HapMap SNPs  used in the original linkage disequilibrium score regression studies 36,68
.
Computing genetic correlations with linkage disequilibrium score regression is  robust to sample overlap, so we included summary statistics from GWASs that also  included UK Biobank (denoted with a blue star in Extended Data Figs. 8–10). For  some traits, the results are displayed for summary statistics without UK Biobank,  even if the GWASs from the original studies included UK Biobank participants.  This was the case for major depressive disorder 69  and EA 26 , for which we used the  same summary statistics that we used for the polygenic scores; namely, from the  GWASs that were re-run excluding UK Biobank. However, the genetic correlations  for major depressive disorder and EA obtained with the summary statistics that did  include UK Biobank were almost identical.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability This research was conducted using data from the UK Biobank resource (application  number 12514) and dbGaP (accession number: phs000674). UK Biobank data can  be accessed on request once a research project has been submitted and approved  by the UK Biobank committee. dbGaP data can also be accessed on request once  a research project has been submitted and approved by dbGaP. The regional  measures that have been analysed are publicly available and can be downloaded  using the links provided in the Methods.
Code availability Custom R code used for statistical analyses (for example, the computation of  Moran’s I) is available from the corresponding authors on request.
Received: 30 October 2018; Accepted: 18 September 2019;   Published online: 21 October 2019 References  1. Tobler, W. R. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit  region. Econ.  Geog. 46, 234–240 (1970).
 2. Novembre, J. et al. Genes mirror geography within Europe. Nature 456,  98–101 (2008).
 3. Abdellaoui, A. et al. Population structure, migration, and   diversifying selection in the Netherlands. Eur.  J.  Hum.  Genet. 21,   1277–1285 (2013).
 4. Kerminen, S. et al. Fine-scale genetic structure in Finland. G3  (Bethesda) 7,  3459–3468 (2017).
 5. Leslie, S. et al. The fine-scale genetic structure of the British population.  Nature 519, 309–314 (2015).
 6. Zhang, G., Muglia, L. J., Chakraborty, R., Akey, J. M. & Williams, S. M.  Signatures of natural selection on genetic variants affecting complex human  traits. Appl.  Transl.  Genom. 2, 78–94 (2013).
 7. Berg, J. J. & Coop, G. A population genetic signal of polygenic adaptation.  PLoS  Genet. 10, e1004412 (2014).
 8. Turkheimer, E. Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean.   Curr.  Dir.  Psychol.  Sci. 9, 160–164 (2000).
 9. Coulter, R. & Scott, J. What motivates residential mobility? Re‐examining  self‐reported reasons for desiring and making residential moves. Popul.  Space   Place 21, 354–371 (2015).
 10. Long, J. Rural–urban migration and socioeconomic mobility in Victorian  Britain. J.  Econ.  Hist. 65, 1–35 (2005).
 11. Park,  C. Sacred  Worlds:  An  Introduction  to  Geography  and  Religion  (Routledge, 2002).
 12. Rodden, J. The geographic distribution of political preferences. Annu.  Rev.   Polit.  Sci. 13, 321–340 (2010).
 13. Boyle, P. Population geography: migration and inequalities in mortality and  morbidity. Prog.  Hum.  Geog. 28, 767–776 (2004).
 14. Lewis, G. & Booth, M. Regional differences in mental health in Great Britain.  J.  Epidemiol.  Community  Health 46, 608–611 (1992).
 15. Tyrrell, J. et al. Height, body mass index, and socioeconomic status:  Mendelian randomisation study in UK Biobank. Br.  Med.  J. 352,   i582 (2016).
 16. Marmot, M. The health gap: the challenge of an unequal world. Lancet 386,  2442–2444 (2015).
 17. Beard, E. et al. Healthier central England or North–South divide? Analysis of  national survey data on smoking and high-risk drinking. BMJ  Open 7,  e014210 (2017).
 18. Brimblecombe, N., Dorling, D. & Shaw, M. Migration and geographical  inequalities in health in Britain. Soc.  Sci.  Med. 50, 861–878 (2000).
 19. Davey Smith, G. & Ebrahim, S. ‘Mendelian randomization’: can genetic  epidemiology contribute to understanding environmental determinants of  disease? Int.  J.  Epidemiol. 32, 1–22 (2003).
 20. Richards, J. B. & Evans, D. M. Back to school to protect against coronary  heart disease? Br.  Med.  J. https://www.bmj.com/content/358/bmj.j3849 (2017).
 21. Verweij, K. J., Mosing, M. A., Zietsch, B. P. & Medland, S. E. in Statistical  Human  Genetics 151–170 (Springer, 2012).
 22. Sudlow, C. et al. UK Biobank: an open access resource for identifying the  causes of a wide range of complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS  Med.  12, e1001779 (2015).
 23. Price, A. L. et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in  genome-wide association studies. Nat.  Genet. 38, 904–909 (2006).
 24. Wray, N. R. et al. Pitfalls of predicting complex traits from SNPs. Nat.  Rev.   Genet. 14, 507–515 (2013).
 25. Moran, P. A. Notes on continuous stochastic phenomena. Biometrika 37,  17–23 (1950).
 26. Okbay, A. et al. Genome-wide association study identifies 74 loci associated  with educational attainment. Nature 533, 539–542 (2016).
 27. Lee, J. J. et al. Gene discovery and polygenic prediction from a genome-wide  association study of educational attainment in 1.1 million individuals. Nat.  Genet. 50, 1112–1121 (2018).
 28. Pasaniuc, B. & Price, A. L. Dissecting the genetics of complex traits using  summary association statistics. Nat.  Rev.  Genet. 18, 117–127 (2017).
 29. Haworth, S. et al. Apparent latent structure within the UK Biobank sample  has implications for epidemiological analysis. Nat.  Commun. 10,   333 (2019).
 30. Niedomysl, T. How migration motives change over migration distance:  evidence on variation across socio-economic and demographic groups.   Reg.  Stud. 45, 843–855 (2011).
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1341 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur  31. Foden, M., Fothergill, S. & Gore, T. The  State  of  the  Coalfields:  Economic  and   Social  Conditions  in  the  Former  Mining  Communities  of  England,  Scotland  and   Wa l e s (Centre for Regional Economic and Social Research, Sheffield Hallam  Univ., 2014).
 32. Beatty, C., Fothergill, S. & Powell, R. Twenty years on: has the economy of  the UK coalfields recovered? Environ.  Plan.  A 39, 1654–1675 (2007).
 33. Townsend, P., Phillimore, P. & Beattie, A. Health  and  Deprivation:  Inequality   and  the  North (Routledge, 1988).
 34. Kong, A. et al. Selection against variants in the genome associated with  educational attainment. Proc.  Natl  Acad.  Sci.  USA 114, E727–E732 (2017).
 35. Hill, W. D. et al. Molecular genetic contributions to social deprivation and  household income in UK Biobank. Curr.  Biol. 26, 3083–3089 (2016).
 36. Finucane, H. K. et al. Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using  genome-wide association summary statistics. Nat.  Genet. 47, 1228–1235 (2015).
 37. Cetateanu, A. & Jones, A. Understanding the relationship between food  environments, deprivation and childhood overweight and obesity: evidence  from a cross sectional England-wide study. Health  Place 27, 68–76 (2014).
 38. Silventoinen, K. et al. Parental education and genetics of BMI from infancy to  old age: a pooled analysis of 29 twin cohorts. Obesity 27, 855–865 (2019).
 39. Menozzi, P., Piazza, A. & Cavalli-Sforza, L. Synthetic maps of human gene  frequencies in Europeans. Science 201, 786–792 (1978).
 40. Berg, J. J. et al. Reduced signal for polygenic adaptation of height in UK  Biobank. eLife 8, e39725 (2019).
 41. Sohail, M. et al. Polygenic adaptation on height is overestimated due to  uncorrected stratification in genome-wide association studies. eLife 8,   e39702 (2019).
 42. Abdellaoui, A. et al. Educational attainment influences levels of homozygosity  through migration and assortative mating. PLoS  One 10, e0118935 (2015).
 43. Domingue, B. W., Rehkopf, D. H., Conley, D. & Boardman, J. D. Geographic  clustering of polygenic scores at different stages of the life course. RSF 4,  137–149 (2018).
 44. Cummins, S. C., McKay, L. & MacIntyre, S. McDonald’s restaurants and  neighborhood deprivation in Scotland and England. Am.  J.  Prev.  Med. 29,  308–310 (2005).
 45. Alford, J. R., Funk, C. L. & Hibbing, J. R. Are political orientations genetically  transmitted? Am.  Polit.  Sci.  Rev. 99, 153–167 (2005).
 46. Benjamin, D. J. et al. The genetic architecture of economic and political  preferences. Proc.  Natl  Acad.  Sci.  USA 109, 8026–8031 (2012).
 47. Hatemi, P. K. & McDermott, R. The genetics of politics: discovery, challenges,  and progress. Trends  Genet. 28, 525–533 (2012).
 48. Hatemi, P. K., Medland, S. E., Morley, K. I., Heath, A. C. & Martin, N. G. The  genetics of voting: an Australian twin study. Behav.  Genet. 37, 435–448 (2007).
 49. Smith, K. et al. Biology, ideology, and epistemology: how do we know  political attitudes are inherited and why should we care? Am.  J.  Polit.  Sci. 56,  17–33 (2012).
 50. Koenig, L. B., McGue, M., Krueger, R. F. & Bouchard, T. J. Genetic and  environmental influences on religiousness: findings for retrospective and  current religiousness ratings. J.  Pers. 73, 471–488 (2005).
 51. Alabrese, E., Becker, S. O., Fetzer, T. & Novy, D. Who voted for Brexit?  Individual and regional data combined. Eur.  J.  Polit.  Econ. 56, 132–150 (2019).
 52. Fry, A. et al. Comparison of sociodemographic and health-related  characteristics of UK Biobank participants with those of the general  population. Am.  J.  Epidemiol. 186, 1026–1034 (2017).
 53. Selzam, S. et al. Comparing within-and between-family polygenic score  prediction. Am.  J.  Hum.  Genet. 105, 351–363 (2019).
 54. Kong, A. et al. The nature of nurture: effects of parental genotypes. Science  359, 424–428 (2018).
 55. Llobera, J. R. An  Invitation  to  Anthropology:  the  Structure,  Evolution  and   Cultural  Identity  of  Human  Societies (Berghahn Books, 2003).
 56. Robinson, M. R. et al. Genetic evidence of assortative mating in humans.   Nat.  Hum.  Behav. 1, 0016 (2017).
 57. Hugh-Jones, D., Verweij, K. J., Pourcain, B. S. & Abdellaoui, A. Assortative  mating on educational attainment leads to genetic spousal resemblance for  polygenic scores. Intelligence 59, 103–108 (2016).
 58. Bycroft, C. et al. The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and  genomic data. Nature 562, 203–209 (2018).
 59. Yang, J., Lee, S. H., Goddard, M. E. & Visscher, P. M. GCTA: a tool for  genome-wide complex trait analysis. Am.  J.  Hum.  Genet. 88, 76–82 (2011).
 60. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium.A global reference for human genetic  variation. Nature 526, 68–74 (2015).
 61. Abraham, G., Qiu, Y. & Inouye, M. FlashPCA2: principal component analysis  of Biobank-scale genotype datasets. Bioinformatics 33, 2776–2778 (2017).
 62. McCarthy, S. et al. A reference panel of 64,976 haplotypes for genotype  imputation. Nat.  Genet. 48, 1279–1283 (2016).
 63. Purcell, S. et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and  population-based linkage analyses. Am.  J.  Hum.  Genet. 81, 559–575 (2007).
 64. Office for National Statistics; National Records of Scotland; Northern Ireland  Statistics and Research Agency. 2011 Census aggregate data. UK  Data  Service  https://doi.org/10.5257/census/aggregate-2011-2 (Edition: February 2017).   65. Altman, D. G. & Bland, J. M. Statistics notes: the normal distribution. Br.    Med.  J. 310, 298 (1995).
 66. Loh, P.-R. et al. Efficient Bayesian mixed-model analysis increases association  power in large cohorts. Nat.  Genet. 47, 284–290 (2015).
 67. Yang, J., Zaitlen, N. A., Goddard, M. E., Visscher, P. M. & Price, A. L.  Advantages and pitfalls in the application of mixed-model association  methods. Nat.  Genet. 46, 100–106 (2014).
 68. Bulik-Sullivan, B. K. et al. LD score regression distinguishes confounding  from polygenicity in genome-wide association studies. Nat.  Genet. 47,  291–295 (2015).
 69. Wray, N. R. et al. Genome-wide association analyses identify 44 risk variants  and refine the genetic architecture of major depression. Nat.  Genet. 50,  668–681 (2018).
Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Australian National Health and Medical Research  Council (1107258, 1078901, 1078037, 1056929, 1048853 and 1113400) and the Sylvia  and Charles Viertel Charitable Foundation (Senior Medical Research Fellowship). A.A.  and K.J.H.V. are supported by the Foundation Volksbond Rotterdam. A.A. and M.G.N.  are supported by ZonMw grants 849200011 and 531003014 from The Netherlands  Organisation for Health Research and Development. B.P.Z. received funding from the  Australian Research Council (FT160100298). The research was conducted using data  from the UK Biobank Resource (application number: 12514) and dbGaP (accession  number: phs000674). The Genetic Epidemiology Research on Adult Health and Aging  study was supported by grant RC2 AG036607 from the National Institutes of Health, as  well as grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Ellison Medical Foundation,  Wayne and Gladys Valley Foundation and Kaiser Permanente. The authors thank the  Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Plan, Northern California Region members who  participated in the Kaiser Permanente Research Program on Genes, Environment and  Health. This study was conducted using UK Biobank resources under application number  12514. UK Biobank was established by the Wellcome Trust medical charity, Medical  Research Council, Department of Health, Scottish Government and Northwest Regional  Development Agency. It also received funding from the Welsh Assembly Government,  British Heart Foundation and Diabetes UK. The funders had no role in study design, data  collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Author contributions A.A., D.H.-J. and P.M.V. conceived and designed the study. A.A., D.H.-J., L.Y. and K.E.K.  analysed the data. A.A. wrote the manuscript and produced the figures. D.H.-J., L.Y.,  K.E.K., M.G.N., L.V., Y.H., B.P.Z., T.M.F., N.R.W., J.Y., K.J.H.V. and P.M.V. provided  significant feedback on the analyses and the manuscript. P.M.V. supervised the project.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0757-5.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41562-019-0757-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.A. or P.M.V.
Peer review information Primary Handling Editor: Stavroula Kousta.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019 NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | VOL 3 | DECEMBEr 2019 | 1332–1342 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 1342 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 1 | Variation explained by regional differences of uncorrected polygenic scores. Linear mixed model results, with phenotype or  polygenic score (without regressing out 100 PCs) as a dependent variable and region as random effect (N = 320,940 unrelated individuals). Left: Local  Authorities (~380 regions); Middle: MSOA (~5,300 regions), right: Coal mining regions (fitted as a binary variable). red: Birth Place; Green: Current  Address; Yellow = significant after FDr correction.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 2 | Variation explained by regional differences of ancestry-corrected polygenic scores. Linear mixed model results, with phenotype  or polygenic score (after regressing out 100 PCs) as a dependent variable and region as random effect (N = 320,940 unrelated individuals). Left: Local  Authorities (~380 regions); Middle: MSOA (~5,300 regions), right: Coal mining regions (fitted as a binary variable). red: Birth Place; Green: Current  Address; Yellow = significant after FDr correction.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 3 | Variation explained by regional differences of ancestry-informative PCs. Linear mixed model results, with PCs as a dependent  variable and region as random effect (N = 320,940 unrelated individuals). Left: Local Authorities (~380 regions); Middle: MSOA (~5,300 regions), right:  Coal mining regions (fitted as a binary variable). red: Birth Place; Green: Current Address; Yellow = significant after FDr correction.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 4 | Associations between polygenic scores and regional measures of socio-economic outcomes. The standardized effect size  estimates of robust linear regressions of polygenic scores on regional measures of socio-economic outcomes in unrelated UK Biobank participants of  European descent (N ~320k). The polygenic scores are all standardized residuals after regressing out 100 PCs. Every individual was given the value of their  region. Significant effects are colored, whereby the significance threshold is based on FDr correction across all tests shown in all four panels. All SEs were  ≤ .002.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 5 | Associations between polygenic scores and regional measures of nutrition and health. The standardized effect size estimates  of robust linear regressions of polygenic scores on regional measures of nutrition and health outcomes in unrelated UK Biobank participants of European  descent (N ~320k). The polygenic scores are all standardized residuals after regressing out 100 PCs. Every individual was given the value of their region.  Significant effects are colored, whereby the significance threshold is based on FDr correction across all tests shown in all four panels. All SEs were ≤ .002.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 6 | Associations between polygenic scores and regional measures of religiosity and political preference. The standardized effect size  estimates of robust linear regressions of polygenic scores on regional measures of religiosity and election outcomes in unrelated UK Biobank participants  of European descent (N ~320k). The polygenic scores are all standardized residuals after regressing out 100 PCs. Every individual was given the value of  their region. Significant effects are colored, whereby the significance threshold is based on FDr correction across all tests shown in all four panels. All SEs  were ≤ .002.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 7 | Associations between polygenic scores and individual-level phenotypes. The standardized effect size estimates of robust linear  regressions of polygenic scores on individual level phenotypes in unrelated UK Biobank participants of European descent (N ~320k). The polygenic scores  are all standardized residuals after regressing out 100 PCs. Significant effects are colored, whereby the significance threshold is based on FDr correction  across all tests shown in all four panels. All SEs were ≤ .002.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 8 | Genetic correlations between regional measures of socio-economic outcomes and a range of complex traits and diseases.  Genetic correlations (above) and their SEs (below) based on LD score regression for the rGWASs on SES-related traits. Colored is significant after FDr  correction. The green numbers in the left part of the Figure below the diagonal of 1’s are the phenotypic correlations between the regional outcomes. The  blue stars next to the trait names indicate that UK Biobank was part of the GWAS of the trait. See Supplementary Table 3 for the list of GWASs that the  summary statistics of the complex traits were derived from.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 9 | Genetic correlations between regional measures of health- and nutrition and a range of complex traits and diseases. Genetic  correlations (above) and their SEs (below) based on LD score regression for the rGWASs on health- and nutrition-related traits. Colored is significant after  FDr correction. The green numbers in the left part of the Figure below the diagonal of 1’s are the phenotypic correlations between the regional outcomes.  The blue stars next to the trait names indicate that UK Biobank was part of the GWAS of the trait. See Supplementary Table 3 for the list of GWASs that  the summary statistics of the complex traits were derived from.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
Articles NATurE HumAN BEHAvIOur Extended Data Fig. 10 | Genetic correlations between regional measures of religiosity and political preference and a range of complex traits and  diseases. Genetic correlations (above) and their SEs (below) based on LD score regression for the rGWASs on ideology-related traits (religion and  political preference). Colored is significant after FDr correction. The green numbers in the left part of the Figure below the diagonal of 1’s are the  phenotypic correlations between the regional outcomes. The blue stars next to the trait names indicate that UK Biobank was part of the GWAS of the trait.  See Supplementary Table 3 for the list of GWASs that the summary statistics of the complex traits were derived from.
NATuRE HuMAN BEHAViouR | www.nature.com/nathumbehav 
1 nature research  |  reporting summary October 2018 Corresponding author(s): Abdel Abdellaoui & Peter M. Visscher Last updated by author(s): May 8, 2019 Reporting Summary Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency  in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided  Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)  AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals) For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted  Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code Policy information about availability of computer code Data collection The data used was collected by UK Biobank; see for more details Bycroft, C. et al  (2018). The UK Biobank resource with deep  phenotyping and genomic data. Nature 562, 203.
Data analysis GCTA, PLINK, fastPCA v2, BOLT-LMM, and R. R-scripts are available upon request.  For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.  We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data Policy information about availability of data All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:  - Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets  - A list of figures that have associated raw data  - A description of any restrictions on data availability This study makes use of data from the UK Biobank Resource (Application Number: 12514) and dbGaP (Accession Number: phs000674).
Field-specific reporting Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciencesBehavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences 
2 nature research  |  reporting summary October 2018 For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf Life sciences study design All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size The sample size was determined by UK Biobank; see for more details Bycroft, C. et al  (2018). The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping  and genomic data. Nature 562, 203.
Data exclusions In order to avoid bias due to populations stratification, we excluded participants with non-European ancestry as determined by PCA on  genome-wide SNPs (details are described in the Online Methods).
Replication The current study was successful because of the exceptionally large sample size of UK Biobank, allowing for sufficient participants per  geographic region in the UK to make inferences about polygenic scores. There are no genotype datasets of similar size and geographic spread  as this one, making replication not (yet) feasible.  Randomization The participants were chosen across 22 assessment centers throughout Great Britain in order to cover a variety of different settings providing  socioeconomic and ethnic heterogeneity and urban–rural mix ; see for more details Bycroft, C. et al  (2018). The UK Biobank resource with  deep phenotyping and genomic data. Nature 562, 203.
Blinding Blinding was not relevant as this was not an experimental design.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,  system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.  Materials & experimental systems n/aInvolved in the study Antibodies Eukaryotic cell lines Palaeontology Animals and other organisms Human research participants Clinical data Methods n/aInvolved in the study ChIP-seq Flow cytometry MRI-based neuroimaging Human research participants Policy information about studies involving human research participants Population characteristics A total of 502,536 participants (273,402 females and 229,134 males) aged between 37 and 73 years old were recruited in the UK  between 2006 and 2010. The participants were recruited across 22 assessment centers throughout Great Britain in order to  cover a variety of different settings providing socioeconomic and ethnic heterogeneity and urban–rural mix. See for more details  Bycroft, C. et al  (2018). The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data. Nature 562, 203.
Recruitment The UK Biobank ascertainment strategy was designed to capture sufficient variation in socioeconomic, urban–rural, and ethnic  background. The participation rate however was 5.45% and was biased towards older, more healthy, and female residents. The  UK Biobank sample does reflect nationally representative data sources to a significant degree.
Ethics oversight The participants of this study come from UK Biobank (UKB), which has received ethical approval from the National Health Service  North West Centre for Research Ethics Committee (reference: 11/NW/0382).  Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.