Draft version July 17, 2025 Typeset using L A T E X default style in AASTeX63 Is the Interstellar Object 3I/ATLAS Alien Technology?
Adam Hibberd, 1 Adam Crowl, 1 and Abraham Loeb 2 1 Initiative for Interstellar Studies (i4is), 27/29 South Lambeth Road London, SW8 1SZ United Kingdom 2 Astronomy Department, Harvard University, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge MA 02138 USA ABSTRACT At  this  early  stage  of  its  passage  through  our  Solar  System,  3I/ATLAS,  the  recently  discovered interstellar interloper, has displayed various anomalous characteristics, determined from photometric and astrometric observations.  As largely a pedagogical exercise, in this paper we present additional analysis into the astrodynamics of 3I/ATLAS, and hypothesize that this object could be technological, and possibly hostile as would be expected from the ’Dark Forest’ resolution to the ’Fermi Paradox’.
We show that 3I/ATLAS approaches surprisingly close to Venus, Mars and Jupiter, with a probability of≲0.005%.  Furthermore the low retrograde tilt of 3I/ATLAS’s orbital plane to the ecliptic offers various benefits to an Extra-terrestrial Intelligence (ETI), since it allows the object access to our planet with relative impunity.  The eclipse by the Sun from Earth of 3I/ATLAS at perihelion, would allow it to conduct a clandestine reverse Solar Oberth Manoeuvre, an optimal high-thrust strategy for interstellar spacecraft to brake and stay bound to the Sun.  An optimal intercept of Earth would entail an arrival in late November/early December of 2025, and also, a non-gravitational acceleration of∼5.9×10 −5 au day −2 , normalized at 1 au from the Sun, would indicate an intent to intercept the planet Jupiter, not far off its path, and a strategy to rendezvous with it after perihelion.
1.INTRODUCTION This paper is contingent on a remarkable but, as we shall show, testable hypothesis, to which the authors do not necessarily ascribe, yet is certainly worthy of an analysis and a report, for two reasons: 1. The  consequences,  should  the  hypothesis  turn  out  to  be  correct,  could  potentially  be  dire  for  humanity,  and would possibly require defensive measures to be undertaken (though these might prove futile).
2. The hypothesis is an interesting exercise in its own right, and is fun to pursue, irrespective of its likely validity.
The hypothesis in question is that the recent interstellar visitor to our Solar System, 3I/ATLAS (Seligman et al.
2025; Bolin et al. 2025; Opitom et al. 2025; Alvarez-Candal et al. 2025; Hopkins et al. 2025, 2024; Taylor & Seligman 2025; Kakharov & Loeb 2025; Loeb 2025a,b), is a technological artifact, and furthermore has active intelligence.  If this is the case, then two possibilities follow:  first that its intentions are entirely benign and second they are malign.
In  the  first  case,  humanity  need  do  nothing  save  await  the  arrival  of  this  intelligence  with  open  arms.   It  is  the second  eventuality  which  is  of  most  concern,  and  according  to  the  so-called  ’Dark  Forest’  resolution  to  the  ’Fermi Paradox’, would be more likely, as it would neatly explain the singular lack of success of the SETI initiative to-date (SETI Institute 2025).
Discovered on 1 st July 2025, by theAsteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System, 3I/ATLAS is, as its designation indicates, the latest interstellar object (or interloper) to be discovered passing through our Solar System.  The first, 1I/’Oumuamua, detected in 2017, was only visible for a period of 2 months, though various anomalous features of this object have yet to be clarified (Bannister et al. 2019; Loeb 2022).  Despite this, there are still very entrenched opinions on the subject in the scientific community as Eldadi, Tenenbaum and Loeb submitted to ”Psychological Review” on Corresponding author:  Adam Hibberd adam.hibberd@i4is.org arXiv:2507.12213v1  [astro-ph.EP]  16 Jul 2025 
2Hibberd, Crowl & Loeb EvidenceDescriptionDetails 13I/ATLAS orbital plane lies virtually in the Ecliptic, though retrogade, i = 175.11 ◦ p∼0.2% 23I/ATLAS is too large to be an asteroidp≲10 −6 ×1I 33I/ATLAS shows no evidence of cometary outgassingNo spectral signs 43I/ATLAS approaches unusually close to Venus, Mars and Jupiterp∼0.005 % 53I/ATLAS achieves perihelion on the opposite side of the Sun to Earthp∼7 % 6The optimal point to do a reverse Solar Oberth and stay bound to the Sun is at perihelionRefer to Figure 73I/ATLAS’s incoming radiant made it hard to detect sooner 8The ∆V needed to intercept Jupiter is smallRefer to Figure 9The ∆V needed to intercept Mars is smallRefer to Figure Table 1.Considerations which support the hypothesis that 3I/ATLAS is technological July 9 th , 2025 (Eldadi, O. and Tenenbaum, G. and Loeb, A. 2025).
Perhaps one of the most puzzling observations is the presence of a statistically significant ’non-gravitational’ accel- eration (i.e.  4.92±0.16)×10 –6 m s −1 (Micheli et al. 2018) (normalized to a distance of 1 au from the Sun), despite there being no evidence of cometary outgassing from 1I/’Oumuamua (Trilling et al. 2018), the most likely cause of non-gravitational accelerations of this kind.
The discourse on whether the object 1I/Oumuamua was artifical, i.e.  the non-gravitational force was actually solar radiation  pressure  (SRP)  on  extremely  thin  photonic  (solar)  sails  (Bialy  &  Loeb  2018),  has  been  mired  in  bitter controversy.  Yet nevertheless it seems to the authors as a hypothesis perfectly worthy of pursuing, in a similar fash- ion to the hypothesis proposed in this paper, and the consequences derived can then be rejected or accepted accordingly.
We  employ  ’OITS’  (or  ’Optimum  Interplanetary  Trajectory  Software’),  the  interplanetary  mission  design  tool, to investigate the  likelihood and implications  of 3I/ATLAS being an  alien spacecraft,  with  high and/or  low thrust manoeuvrability.  For further information regarding OITS, proceed to Hibberd (2017, 2022) and Hibberd et al. (2021).
For this analysis, two possible Non-Linear Problem (NLP) solver options are available, namely NOMAD (Le Digabel 2011) or MIDACO (Schlueter et al. 2009; Schlueter & Gerdts 2010; Schlueter et al. 2013).  The efficacy of this software has  been  proven  for  a  variety  of  applications,  for  example  for  previous  interstellar  objects,  such  as  1I/’Oumuamua and 2I/Borisov as well as for terrestrial planets (Hein et al. 2019, 2022; Hibberd et al. 2020; Hibberd & Hein 2021; Hibberd et al. 2021; Hibberd 2023a,b).
2.EVIDENCE FOR THE HYPOTHESIS Table 1 summarises the different factors which support our hypothesis.  These are each addressed in turn below.
Taking the 1 st row in Table 1, it appears that besides the fact it is clearly on a hyperbolic trajectory, that possesses a non-zero speed at an infinite distance from the Sun of∼60 km s −1 ;  there is a further extremely unusual feature of 3I/ATLAS’s trajectory which is that its orbital plane is tilted only slightly from the ecliptic (∼5 ◦ ),  and is ret- rograde.  This means attempts by humanity to intercept it, or even more difficult rendezvous with it, are extremely challenging if not impossible with chemical rockets,  yet nonetheless,  as we shall see,  allows 3I/ATLAS to intercept certain  key  target  planets  with  relative  ease.   Furthermore,  a  low  ecliptic  tilt  at  a  distance  from  the  Sun,  would enable an ETI, through astrometric measurements, to determine the orbits and masses of the Solar System planets, allowing  it  to  prepare  an  optimal  approach  strategy  to  the  Solar  System.   The  likelihood  for  such  a  perfect  align- ment of the orbital angular momentum vector around the Sun for Earth and 3I/ATLAS isπ(5 ◦ /57 ◦ ) 2 /(4π) = 2×10 −3
.
Missions to 3I/ATLAS would have been much easier had the interstellar object been travelling in the ecliptic plane prograde.   Figure  1  illustrates  opportunities  to  3I/ATLAS  expire  by  the  year  end,  and  even  then  would  only  be achievable for a SpaceX Starship refuelled in low Earth orbit (LEO), and a spacecraft payload with nuclear thermal 
If 3I/ATLAS is Alien Tech3 Figure 1.Pork Chop plot detail for flyby missions to 3I/ATLAS, withC 3 <1500 km 2 s −2
.
propulsion (NTP) (thusC 3 <1500 km 2 s −2 for this plot 1 , constitutes an extremely challenging launcher requirement).
2 nd in Table 1, it is clear, as-of-writing, that the true nature of 3I/ATLAS is somewhat ambiguous.  Apart from the hypothesis proposed already, two distinct yet natural incarnations present themselves for this object: 1. It is an asteroid, in which case, assuming a standard albedo of 0.05, the object must be around 20 km in diameter (Seligman et al. 2025; Loeb 2025a,b).
2. It is a comet, in which case the object would be surrounded by a fuzzy coma, with a much smaller nucleus (Loeb 2025a).
Both of these natural explanations present difficulties, however.
In the first case, because the prevalence of interstellar objects of size 20 km should be much lower, by many orders of magnitude, than that of objects the size of 1I/’Oumuamua (which was 2 orders of magnitude smaller than 3I/ATLAS), this then implies the visit into our Solar System of 3I/ATLAS should be an exceedingly low probability (Loeb 2025a).
In  the  second  case,  there  has  been  to-date  absolutely  no  sign  from  spectroscopic  analysis  of  cometary  activity on  3I/ATLAS.  Such  activity  would  imply  a  much  smaller  nucleus  and  allow  3I/ATLAS  to  be  drawn  from  a  much larger interstellar population.  We await with anticipation further observations of 3I/ATLAS which should clarify the situation.   The  fuzz  observed  around  3I/ATLAS  is  inconclusive  given  the  motion  of  the  object  and  the  inevitable smearing of the image over the exposure time (Seligman et al. 2025; Opitom et al. 2025).
4 th in Table 1,  we find that 3I/ATLAS approaches particularly close to Venus,  Mars and Jupiter during its visit to our Solar System,  refer to Table 2.  In the following analysis we assume that 3I/ATLAS is on its current orbit, 1 C 3 is known as the ”Characteristic Energy” at Launch and is the square of the Earth hyperbolic excess speed on escaping the Earth’s gravitational sphere of influence 
4Hibberd, Crowl & Loeb Min.Max.Long.
ClosestPoss.Poss.Error SemiApproachClosestClosestatProb.
PlanetmajorofApproachApproachActualObserved axis3I/ATLASofofClosestLong.
(au)(au)3I/ATLAS3I/ATLASApproachError (au)(au) Venus0.7230.650.6272.0739.95°5.53% Mars1.5240.190.0002.8747.14°3.97% Jupiter5.2030.360.0006.5533.96°2.20% Overall Probability0.005% Table 2.Pertinent Parameters concerning the alignment of 3I/ATLAS with Venus, Mars and Jupiter but vary the time-of-entry into the Solar System (or equivalently the time of perihelion), assuming 3I/ATLAS could have come at any time into the Solar System, and happened to do so such that it came within the observed closest approaches of Venus, Mars and Jupiter.  The probability of this is 0.005% We further assume that the closest approach of 3I/ATLAS to the planet is entirely a consequence of its difference in heliocentric longitude.  In practice, this will not actually be the case, and this constitutes an UPPER BOUND on probability.
The 6 th column of Table 2 provides the degree of misalignment in longitude between the planet in question and the interstellar object, at its closest approach.  As the orbits of the planets are nearly circular, then if this longitudinal difference is say X degrees, then the probability of the planet lying within X degrees longitude of 3I/ATLAS is : P= 2(X/ ◦ ) 360 (1) The final column is a calculation of this probability in %.  The overall probability of ALL 3 planets aligning in this way is the product of these 3 values and amounts to≲0.005%.
The 5 th row of Table 1 shows that, at its perihelion on 29 th October 2025, when it reaches 1.35 au from the Sun, 3I/ATLAS will be totally obscured from the Earth by the Sun.  If we assume this obscuration occurs within a solar elongation of 30 ◦ , then it is straight forward to calculate the likelihood of this alignment with the Sun and Earth as ∼7%.  But why should such a celestial alignment be indicative of intelligence?
Referring to the 6 th row of Table 1, we find a possible motivation, since the optimal braking strategy to stay bound to the Sun for high thrust propulsion is a ’reverse Solar Oberth’, where all the thrust is imparted at perihelion.  Thus, any manoeuvres of this kind would be obscured from Earth observation, allowing a surprise arrival on Earth to be conducted.
The 7 th row in Table 1 reveals a curious feature of 3I/ATLAS’s apparent direction of origin, in that 3I/ATLAS’s incoming  radiant  to  the  Solar  System  was  from  the  direction  of  the  Galactic  Centre,  a  particularly  bright  region, which,  as has been noted elsewhere,  made the object particularly difficult to discern by Earth-based telescopes,  in turn rendering it less conducive to early detection.
The  relevance  of  this  is  that  had  the  object  indeed  been  discovered  earlier,  then  there  would  have  been  some possibility that humanity could have mounted an intercept mission,  a recourse that was out-of-the-question by the time 3I/ATLAS was actually detected.  Figure 2 shows the optimal intercept trajectory for a mission to 3I/ATLAS, with optimal launch over a year ago.  See also Figure 1.
3.POSSIBLE STRATEGIES AND MOTIVATIONS 
If 3I/ATLAS is Alien Tech5 Figure 2.Optimal trajectory to intercept 3I/ATLAS with launch date on 2024 JUL 09, a full year earlier than the discovery date of this interstellar object 3I/ATLAS has already passed close to Pluto (∼5.1 au) and in the future it will come very close to the inner planets Venus (∼0.65 au) and Mars (∼0.19 au) and Jupiter (∼0.36 au) (see Figure 3).  As a consequence, the ∆V needed by 3I/ATLAS to either (a) intercept any of these planets or (b) send probes to them, is low (see Figure 4).  Mercury and Earth are exceptions, though this makes sense if 3I/ATLAS had narrowed its intentions to planets in the Sun’s habitable zone, the reason for keeping its distance from Earth shall be elucidated below.
Thus, for Venus, the ∆V for intercept is<5 km s −1 before April 2025 and remains<10 km s −1 until the end of July 2025.  Similarly for Mars the ∆V also stays below 5 km s −1 until the end of July 2025.  For Jupiter the intercept ∆V is low (<5 kms −1 ) all the way up to November 2025.  For Earth the intercept ∆V is always above 5 km s −1
.  In all cases it can be seen, as would be expected, the sooner the delivery of this ∆V, the lower its magnitude.  But what does this imply?
A speed of∼5 km s −1 is about equivalent to the speed of an intercontinental ballistic missile, which are generally rocket-propelled.  Thus assuming a similar means of propulsion (chemical), the object 3I/ATLAS could quite easily release probes of the same size, that would reach planets of interest.
Alternatively, 3I/ATLAS might intend to slow down and settle either into a heliocentric bound orbit, or a Jupiter bound one.  There is good reason why it might choose a relatively low perihelion (i.e.  1.35 au on 29 October 2025), since it would then be able to exploit the ’Oberth effect’ and apply all its thrust at this perihelion (Solar Oberth), or on the other hand why it would select a trajectory which swings close by Jupiter (Jupiter Oberth).  Clearly, our Sun and Jupiter are the two most massive bodies in the Solar System and therefore permit a spacecraft to capitalize most on the Oberth effect, enabling a minimum ∆V requirement from the spacecraft’s propulsion system (Blanco & Mungan 2021).
As a reminder, an Oberth manoeuvre is one where thrust of a spacecraft is applied at its maximum orbital speed, namely at periapsis (Blanco & Mungan 2021), so as to maximise the resulting change in kinetic energy.  This applies both to accelerating to achieve Solar System escape, or alternatively to slow down from a high speed (a ’reverse Oberth 
6Hibberd, Crowl & Loeb Figure 3.Evolution of distance of 3I/ATLAS to all the planets and Pluto 
If 3I/ATLAS is Alien Tech7 PlanetA 1 A 2 A 3 au day −2 au day −2 au day −2 Mars-5.39E-05-5.33E-045.14E-04 Mars ∗ 1.19E-04-4.76E-043.55E-04 Jupiter3.53E-052.64E-05-3.85E-05 Table 3.Non-gravitational  accelerations  needed  to  intercept  Mars  and  Jupiter,  normalized  at  1  au,  the  asterisk  for  Mars constrains A 1 >0 manoeuvre’).
Examining Figure 4, we observe that the optimal arrival dates for such an intercept visit either by the object itself, or alternatively a probe or weapon sent by it, will be from 21 st November 2025 to 5 th December 2025, and so this is a testable prediction of the veracity of this hypothesis.
The intercept option would possibly indicate a malign intent, let us now consider in more detail the possibility that 3I/ATLAS wishes to rendezvous with Earth (see Figure 5).  We find that this option is indeed available to 3I/ATLAS and the total ∆V (intercept + rendezvous) is lower the earlier the date of its application.  Should 3I/ATLAS wish to apply this ∆V clandestinely at a low perihelion and at a low solar elongation, the sooner the execution of this initial ∆V in the window of opportunity, the better.  Figure 6 shows that there is a minimum rendezvous ∆V at Earth for an arrival date around March of 2026.
As mentioned, there is the chance that 3I/ATLAS will conduct a Jupiter Oberth, as described in Figure 7.  Since the purpose of this Oberth would be to match velocities (rendezvous) with Jupiter, this involves a delivery of thrust both firstly to intercept Jupiter and then again to slow down into a Jupiter parking orbit.  Figure 8 reveals that a ∆V of at least∼20 km s −1 would be necessary upon arrival at Jupiter, assuming a perijove altitude at 0.05 Jupiter radii.
4.NON-GRAVITATIONAL ACCELERATIONS So far we have addressed impulsive (high thrust) ∆V manoeuvres available to 3I/ATLAS, but what about low thrust manoeuvres?  It is possible using a NOMAD (Le Digabel 2011), REBOUND (Rein & Liu 2012; Rein & Spiegel 2015) and SPICE (Acton 1996; Acton et al. 2018) software application, developed specifically for the purpose, to determine the  minimum  overall  magnitude  of  non-gravitational  acceleration  components  (A 1 ,  A 2 ,  A 3 )  radial,  transverse  and perpendicular  to  the  orbital  plane  respectively  (Marsden  et  al.  1973),  for  3I/ATLAS  to  intercept  Mars  or  Jupiter (see Table 3).  Note that these accelerations are calculated assuming a start of simulation on 8 th July 2025, and are normalized at 1 au.
We find that the A 1 radial component for a Jupiter intercept is positive,  suggesting this could be achieved by a photonic  (solar)  sail.   If  we  take  the  magnitude  for  Jupiter,  we  haveA∼5.85×10 −5 au day −2 normalized  at  1  au (equivalent to 1.17 mm/s 2 ).  Assuming a perfectly reflective sail, a sail areal density ofσ, a critical acceleration of a c , and further that the angle the sail-normal makes with the anti-radial direction is 0 ◦ , which is the upper extreme, we have at 1 au from the Sun (Les Johnson 2024; Maurya et al. 2023): σ/(g/m 2 )< (9.08/μN) (a c /(mm/s 2 )) (2) Insertinga c = 1.17mm/s 2 leads to an upper limit onσ <7.8 g/m 2
.  This is typical of the areal density of sails humanity has developed.  For example a sheet of material of mass density 7,800,000 g/m 3 (not far off iron for example) and with thickness 1μm would have the required areal density.  A circular sail of radius∼10 km (the current estimate of the size of 3I/ATLAS based on no cometary activity) would have a mass of∼4.8×10 6 kg.  The lightness number of the Solar Sailλ(independent of Sun-distance) is defined as the ratio of force from solar radiation pressure to that of gravity.
We find thatλ≳0.20.  As of writing, the Minor Planet Center does not provide estimates of the non-gravitational accelerations for this object.
5.DISCUSSION 
8Hibberd, Crowl & Loeb Figure 4.Optimal ∆Vs for the 4 planets in question (right vertical axis) and also the expected time of arrival (left), vs the date of ∆V application.
 If 3I/ATLAS is Alien Tech9 Figure 5.Thrust ∆V colour contours to enable 3I/ATLAS to intercept the Earth at low solar elongation, given its delivery date (in 2025) and arrival date.  Blank areas indicate low perihelia.
Figure 6.Thrust ∆V colour contours to enable 3I/ATLAS to rendezvous with Earth after a low solar elongation, given the intercept delivery date (in 2025) and arrival date.  Blank areas indicate low perihelia.
 10Hibberd, Crowl & Loeb Figure 7.∆V colour contours to enable 3I/ATLAS to intercept and rendezvous (i.e.  stay in a bound orbit) with Jupiter.
Dates on the x-axis are in 2025/2026.
Figure 8.∆V colour contours to enable 3I/ATLAS to rendezvous (i.e.  stay in a bound orbit) with Jupiter.  Dates on the x-axis are in 2025/2026.
 If 3I/ATLAS is Alien Tech11 We  have  proposed  a  testable  hypothesis,  that  3I/ATLAS  is  technological,  and  have  demonstrated  various  lines of  evidence  to  substantiate  this  hypothesis  (see  Table  1).   The  orbital  path  of  3I/ATLAS  has  some  very  unlikely combination of characteristics, which could quite easily have been simple coincidence, as extremely strange as that os- tensibly appears.  The propensity for the human brain to see patterns in what is actually random scatter is well known.
At the heart of this, is a question any self-respecting scientist will have had to address at some point in their career: ”is an outlier of a sample a consequence of expected random fluctuation, or is there ultimately a sound reason for its observed discrepancy?”  A sensible answer to this hinges largely on the size of the sample in question, and it should be noted that for interstellar objects we have a sample size of only 3, therefore rendering an attempt to draw inferences from what is observed rather problematic.
However we will have centre stage as 3I/ATLAS ventures through our Solar System, except for around its perihelion, and our telescopes currently trained on this object should show any anomalies indicative of technology in the coming months,  though  these  may  only  become  apparent  when  3I/ATLAS  has  passed  perihelion.   As  already  discussed,  a visitor  to  Earth  around  the  end  of  November  to  the  beginning  of  December  2025,  whatever  form  that  might  take, would clearly support our supposition, and furthermore the measurement of significant non-gravitational accelerations (Table 3) would be a huge find.
6.CONCLUSION We  strongly  emphasize  that  this  paper  is  largely  a  pedagogical  exercise,  with  interesting  discoveries  and  strange serendipities, worthy of a record in the scientific literature.  By far the most likely outcome will be that 3I/ATLAS is a completely natural interstellar object, probably a comet, and the authors await the astronomical data to support this likely origin.
Nevertheless when viewed from an open-minded and unprejudiced perspective,  these investigations have revealed many compelling insights into the possibility that 3I/ATLAS is technological, and moreover the calculations presented here are useful even if the interstellar object ends up being a comet like 2I/Borisov because they could be applied to future detections of interstellar objects by the Vera C. Rubin observatory over the coming decade.
7.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Avi Loeb was supported in part by Harvard’s Black Hole Initiative and the Galileo Project.
REFERENCES Acton, C., Bachman, N., Semenov, B., & Wright, E. 2018, Planetary and Space Science, 150, 9, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2017.02.013 Acton, C. H. 1996, Planetary and Space Science, 44, 65, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-0633(95)00107-7 Alvarez-Candal, A., Rizos, J. L., Lara, L. M., et al. 2025, X-SHOOTER Spectrum of Comet C/2025 N1: Insights into a Distant Interstellar Visitor.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.07312 Bannister, M. T., Bhandare, A., Dybczy ́nski, P. A., et al.
2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 594, doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0816-x Bialy, S., & Loeb, A. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 868, L1, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaeda8 Blanco, P. R., & Mungan, C. E. 2021, American Journal of Physics, 89, 72, doi: 10.1119/10.0001956 Bolin, B. T., Belyakov, M., Fremling, C., et al. 2025, Interstellar comet 3I/ATLAS: discovery and physical description.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05252 Eldadi, O. and Tenenbaum, G. and Loeb, A. 2025, Submitted to the journal Psychological Review, Scientific Paradigm Resistance Evidence from the Oumuamua Debate and Cross-Disciplinary Case.
https://avi-loeb.medium.com/ Hein, A. M., Perakis, N., Eubanks, T. M., et al. 2019, Acta Astronaut., 161, 552, doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.12.042 Hein, A. M., Eubanks, T. M., Lingam, M., et al. 2022, Adv.
Space Res., 69, 402, doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2021.06.052 Hibberd, A. 2017, Github repository for OITS.
https://github.com/AdamHibberd/ Optimum InterplanetaryTrajectory Hibberd, A. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2205.10220.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10220 
12Hibberd, Crowl & Loeb —. 2023a, Acta Astronaut., 211, 431, doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2023.06.029 —. 2023b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2305.03065, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.03065 Hibberd, A., & Hein, A. M. 2021, Acta Astronaut., 179, 594, doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.11.038 Hibberd, A., Hein, A. M., & Eubanks, T. M. 2020, Acta Astronautica, 170, 136, doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.01.018 Hibberd, A., Perakis, N., & Hein, A. M. 2021, Acta Astronautica, 189, 584, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.09.006 Hibberd, A., Perakis, N., & Hein, A. M. 2021, Acta Astronaut., 189, 584, doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.09.006 Hopkins, M. J., Bannister, M. T., & Lintott, C. 2024, Predicting Interstellar Object Chemodynamics with Gaia.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04904 —. 2025, The Astronomical Journal, 169, 78, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad9eb3 Kakharov, S., & Loeb, A. 2025, Galactic Trajectories of Interstellar Objects 1I/’Oumuamua, 2I/Borisov, and 3I/Atlas.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.02739 Le Digabel, S. 2011, ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 37, 44 Les Johnson. 2024, Solar Sail Propulsion – Ready for SmallSat Mission Implementation.
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20240010519/ downloads/Solar%20Sail%20Propulsion.pdf Loeb, A. 2022, Astrobiology, 22, 1392, doi: 10.1089/ast.2021.0193 Loeb, A. 2025a, Comment on ”Discovery and Preliminary Characterization of a Third Interstellar Object: 3I/ATLAS” [arXiv:2507.02757].
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05881 —. 2025b, Research Notes of the AAS, 9, 178, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/adee06 Marsden, B. G., Sekanina, Z., & Yeomans, D. K. 1973, AJ, 78, 211, doi: 10.1086/111402 Maurya, M. K., Sultana, R., Baghel, R. S., & Pandey, U. K. 2023, Indian Journal of Physics, 97, 2591, doi: 10.1007/s12648-023-02658-3 Micheli, M., Farnocchia, D., Meech, K., et al. 2018, Nature, 559, 223 Opitom, C., Snodgrass, C., Jehin, E., et al. 2025, Snapshot of a new interstellar comet: 3I/ATLAS has a red and featureless spectrum.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05226 Rein, H., & Liu, S. F. 2012, A&A, 537, A128, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118085 Rein, H., & Spiegel, D. S. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 1424, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2164 Schlueter, M., Egea, J., & Banga, J. 2009, Computers and Operations Research, 36, 2217, doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2008.08.015 Schlueter, M., Erb, S., Gerdts, M., Kemble, S., & Ruckmann, J. 2013, Advances in Space Research, 51, 1116, doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2012.11.006 Schlueter, M., & Gerdts, M. 2010, Journal of Global Optimization, 47, 293, doi: 10.1007/s10898-009-9477-0 Seligman, D. Z., Micheli, M., Farnocchia, D., et al. 2025, Discovery and Preliminary Characterization of a Third Interstellar Object: 3I/ATLAS.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02757 SETI Institute. 2025, SETI Institure Home Page.
https://www.seti.org/ Taylor, A. G., & Seligman, D. Z. 2025, The Kinematic Age of 3I/ATLAS and its Implications for Early Planet Formation.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08111 Trilling, D. E., Mommert, M., Hora, J. L., et al. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 261, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aae88f