GitHub - P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison: Comparison of different C libraries providing generic containers capabilities                                            

[Skip to content](#start-of-content)  

## Navigation Menu

Toggle navigation

[](/)

[Sign in](/login?return_to=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison)

Appearance settings

*   Product
    
    *   [
        
        GitHub Copilot
        
        Write better code with AI
        
        ](https://github.com/features/copilot)
    *   [
        
        GitHub Spark New
        
        Build and deploy intelligent apps
        
        ](https://github.com/features/spark)
    *   [
        
        GitHub Models New
        
        Manage and compare prompts
        
        ](https://github.com/features/models)
    *   [
        
        GitHub Advanced Security
        
        Find and fix vulnerabilities
        
        ](https://github.com/security/advanced-security)
    *   [
        
        Actions
        
        Automate any workflow
        
        ](https://github.com/features/actions)
    
    *   [
        
        Codespaces
        
        Instant dev environments
        
        ](https://github.com/features/codespaces)
    *   [
        
        Issues
        
        Plan and track work
        
        ](https://github.com/features/issues)
    *   [
        
        Code Review
        
        Manage code changes
        
        ](https://github.com/features/code-review)
    *   [
        
        Discussions
        
        Collaborate outside of code
        
        ](https://github.com/features/discussions)
    *   [
        
        Code Search
        
        Find more, search less
        
        ](https://github.com/features/code-search)
    
    Explore
    
    *   [Why GitHub](https://github.com/why-github)
    *   [All features](https://github.com/features)
    *   [Documentation](https://docs.github.com)
    *   [GitHub Skills](https://skills.github.com)
    *   [Blog](https://github.blog)
    
*   Solutions
    
    By company size
    
    *   [Enterprises](https://github.com/enterprise)
    *   [Small and medium teams](https://github.com/team)
    *   [Startups](https://github.com/enterprise/startups)
    *   [Nonprofits](/solutions/industry/nonprofits)
    
    By use case
    
    *   [DevSecOps](/solutions/use-case/devsecops)
    *   [DevOps](/solutions/use-case/devops)
    *   [CI/CD](/solutions/use-case/ci-cd)
    *   [View all use cases](/solutions/use-case)
    
    By industry
    
    *   [Healthcare](/solutions/industry/healthcare)
    *   [Financial services](/solutions/industry/financial-services)
    *   [Manufacturing](/solutions/industry/manufacturing)
    *   [Government](/solutions/industry/government)
    *   [View all industries](/solutions/industry)
    
    [View all solutions](/solutions)
    
*   Resources
    
    Topics
    
    *   [AI](/resources/articles/ai)
    *   [DevOps](/resources/articles/devops)
    *   [Security](/resources/articles/security)
    *   [Software Development](/resources/articles/software-development)
    *   [View all](/resources/articles)
    
    Explore
    
    *   [Learning Pathways](https://resources.github.com/learn/pathways)
    *   [Events & Webinars](https://resources.github.com)
    *   [Ebooks & Whitepapers](https://github.com/resources/whitepapers)
    *   [Customer Stories](https://github.com/customer-stories)
    *   [Partners](https://partner.github.com)
    *   [Executive Insights](https://github.com/solutions/executive-insights)
    
*   Open Source
    
    *   [
        
        GitHub Sponsors
        
        Fund open source developers
        
        ](/sponsors)
    
    *   [
        
        The ReadME Project
        
        GitHub community articles
        
        ](https://github.com/readme)
    
    Repositories
    
    *   [Topics](https://github.com/topics)
    *   [Trending](https://github.com/trending)
    *   [Collections](https://github.com/collections)
    
*   Enterprise
    
    *   [
        
        Enterprise platform
        
        AI-powered developer platform
        
        ](/enterprise)
    
    Available add-ons
    
    *   [
        
        GitHub Advanced Security
        
        Enterprise-grade security features
        
        ](https://github.com/security/advanced-security)
    *   [
        
        Copilot for business
        
        Enterprise-grade AI features
        
        ](/features/copilot/copilot-business)
    *   [
        
        Premium Support
        
        Enterprise-grade 24/7 support
        
        ](/premium-support)
    
*   [Pricing](https://github.com/pricing)

Search or jump to...

# Search code, repositories, users, issues, pull requests...

Search

Clear

[Search syntax tips](https://docs.github.com/search-github/github-code-search/understanding-github-code-search-syntax)

# Provide feedback

We read every piece of feedback, and take your input very seriously.

 Include my email address so I can be contacted

Cancel Submit feedback

# Saved searches

## Use saved searches to filter your results more quickly

Name  

Query 

To see all available qualifiers, see our [documentation](https://docs.github.com/search-github/github-code-search/understanding-github-code-search-syntax).

Cancel Create saved search

[Sign in](/login?return_to=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison)

[Sign up](/signup?ref_cta=Sign+up&ref_loc=header+logged+out&ref_page=%2F%3Cuser-name%3E%2F%3Crepo-name%3E&source=header-repo&source_repo=P-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison)

Appearance settings

Resetting focus

You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert

[P-p-H-d](/P-p-H-d) / **[c-stl-comparison](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison)** Public

*   [Notifications](/login?return_to=%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison) You must be signed in to change notification settings
*   [Fork 5](/login?return_to=%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison)
*   [Star 33](/login?return_to=%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison)
    

Comparison of different C libraries providing generic containers capabilities

### License

[BSD-2-Clause license](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/LICENSE)

[33 stars](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/stargazers) [5 forks](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/forks) [Branches](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/branches) [Tags](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tags) [Activity](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/activity)

[Star](/login?return_to=%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison)

[Notifications](/login?return_to=%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison) You must be signed in to change notification settings

*   [Code](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison)
*   [Issues 0](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/issues)
*   [Pull requests 0](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/pulls)
*   [Actions](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/actions)
*   [Projects 0](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/projects)
*   [Wiki](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/wiki)
*   [Security](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security)
    
    [](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security)
    
    [](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security)
    
    [](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security)
    
    [
    
    ### Uh oh!
    
    ](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security)
    
    [There was an error while loading.](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security) Please reload this page.
    
*   [Insights](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/pulse)

Additional navigation options

*   [Code](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison)
*   [Issues](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/issues)
*   [Pull requests](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/pulls)
*   [Actions](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/actions)
*   [Projects](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/projects)
*   [Wiki](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/wiki)
*   [Security](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/security)
*   [Insights](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/pulse)

# P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison

  

 master

[Branches](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/branches)[Tags](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tags)

[](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/branches)[](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tags)

Go to file

Code

Open more actions menu

## Folders and files

Name

Name

Last commit message

Last commit date

## Latest commit

## History

[76 Commits](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/commits/master/)

[](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/commits/master/)

[.github/workflows](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/.github/workflows "This path skips through empty directories")

[.github/workflows](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/.github/workflows "This path skips through empty directories")

[array-int](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/array-int "array-int")

[array-int](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/array-int "array-int")

[array-mpz](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/array-mpz "array-mpz")

[array-mpz](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/array-mpz "array-mpz")

[array-str](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/array-str "array-str")

[array-str](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/array-str "array-str")

[bench](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/bench "bench")

[bench](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/bench "bench")

[umap-int](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/umap-int "umap-int")

[umap-int](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/umap-int "umap-int")

[umap-mpz](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/umap-mpz "umap-mpz")

[umap-mpz](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/umap-mpz "umap-mpz")

[umap-str](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/umap-str "umap-str")

[umap-str](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/umap-str "umap-str")

[LICENSE](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/LICENSE "LICENSE")

[LICENSE](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/LICENSE "LICENSE")

[Makefile](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/Makefile "Makefile")

[Makefile](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/Makefile "Makefile")

[README.md](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/README.md "README.md")

[README.md](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/blob/master/README.md "README.md")

View all files

## Repository files navigation

*   [README](#)
*   [BSD-2-Clause license](#)

# Introduction

[](#introduction)

The goal of this project is to compare several C libraries that provide some STL like capabilities of the C++ (container template) but are targeting classic C language. A STL like library for C is a C library providing several classic generic containers for the C language, like vector, list, sorted set, unordered\_map, and so on.

A small benchmark to compare their performance is includes in the bench directory.

To do this, the same simple programs will be implemented by the libraries in the more straight-forward way possible, for different kind of containers and for different types. Then the API ergonomics of each programs can be compared each other according to the user taste.

Objective characteristics of the libraries are directly compared in this file.

# Disclaimer

[](#disclaimer)

I am the main author of M\*LIB, one of theses libraries.

This work is still a WIP.

# Test Program

[](#test-program)

## Rules

[](#rules)

The test program shall respect the following conditions:

*   it shall use a basic type (int), a non POD type (the type mpz\_t of the GMP library) and a string as the primary type of the container.
*   it shall not comment the code (the code is assumed to be clear on what it does by itself) except if there is some workaround,
*   it shall not produce any compilation warnings,
*   it shall execute properly,
*   it shall not leak any memory,
*   it shall abort on error,
*   it shall link dynamically with the GMP library ([https://gmplib.org/](https://gmplib.org/)) if needed,
*   it shall link statically with the container library if needed,
*   if a dynamic string container exists in the container library, it shall be used instead of a C string,
*   the optional assertions shall be turned off.

A workaround is defined as a way to implement this program which is **not natural** for the library. This typically includes:

*   create wrapper structure,
*   create wrapper functions or macros,
*   accessing internal fields of the containers (typically for using the qsort function).

For example, if a container library manual requests to define some macro for its use, then it won't be considered as a workaround.

## Array tests

[](#array-tests)

The program shall perform the following operations:

*   declare a dynamic array of int (resp. mpz\_t, a string),
*   initialize this array with the small unsigned integers values 17, 42 and 9 (performing a conversion from unsigned integer to mpz\_t for GMP) or the constant strings "Hello", "World" and "!" for strings,
*   sort this array,
*   iterate the array to print the values.

## Associative array tests

[](#associative-array-tests)

The program shall perform the following operations:

*   declare a non-ordered associative array from int (resp. mpz\_t, a string) to (resp. mpz\_t, a string),
*   initialize this array with the association of signed integers values 17 to 4585, 42 to 4856 and -9 to 1452 (performing a conversion from signed integer to mpz\_t for GMP) or the strings "Hello" to "LIB", "Welcome" to "Program" and "Sincerely" to "Your map" for strings,
*   search for the key "Hello" and display it if successful,
*   iterate the associative array to print the values.

## Execution

[](#execution)

The different programs are available in this repository. To build then, you just need to have a working C11 compiler, a make tool, git the GMP library, and the GLIB library to build then.

Simply run "make" to perform a clone of the projects and generate the different executables.

# Analysis and synthesis

[](#analysis-and-synthesis)

The following characteristics are used to compare the different C libraries. The C++ STL is also included as as reference.

*   What is the supported C language (C89, C99, C11 or C23)?
*   Is it a pure C program (no need for external preprocessor)?
*   Is it a Header only library?
*   How is implemented the Generic mechanism? By using A)void pointer, B)macro, C)\_Generic and macro, D)intrusive field, E)code generation by include, F)code generation by macro
*   Is-it type safe (aka. using an incompatible type produces at least a compilation warning)?
*   support of integer/floats as basic type,
*   support of struct POD data as basic type,
*   support of array as basic type,
*   support of object like data (needing custom constructor, destructor...) as basic type,
*   support of C++ class as basic type,
*   support of copy semantics: containers don't steal the ownership of the object given as parameter (passing an object data to a container will create a proper copy of the object data as per the object semantic),
*   support of move semantics: containers steal the ownership of the object given as parameter,
*   container / basic type spatial separation: the association of the methods of the basic type to the needed operators of the container library can be defined when the basic type is defined (ensuring spatial coherency of the basic type) and not only when the container is defined,
*   support of an adaptation layer to transform the interface of the provided method to the expected interface of the operator,
*   support of basic 'emplace'
*   support of multiple, enhanced 'emplace' based on the initialized arguments,
*   support of iterator abstraction
*   support of sort algorithm
*   support of sort algorithm with custom comparison,
*   support of single linkage definition (use of declaration only for all files except one than include the container definition),
*   full abstraction of the container type (user shall not use internal fields)
*   contract violation checks (assertions on invalid inputs, on input contract violation or error reporting)
*   natural usage of array (using of \[\] operator on the object)
*   basic type is stored in the array, not a pointer to it.
*   don't need explicit instanciation of the array with the basic type,
*   functions are properly prefixed,
*   error handling (return code, exception, abort, none)
*   On exception, destructors of objects on stack are properly called.
*   custom memory functions
*   optional per-container context for custom memory functions
*   support of forward declaration of container
*   support of serialization (JSON, XML)

# Synthesis

[](#synthesis)

Characteristics

STL

M\*LIB

STC

CMC

CTL

CollectionsC

CC

GLIB

C language

NA

\>=C99

\>=C99

\>=C99

\>=C99

\>=C99

\>=C11\* or >=C23

\>= C89

Pure C

NA

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Header only

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

Generic mechanism

template

F

E

F

E

A

C

A

type safe

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y\*

N

integer/float support

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y\*

struct POD support

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y\*

C++ class support

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

C object support

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y\*

Copy semantics

Y

Y

N

N

N

Y

N

Y

Move semantics

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

container/basic spatial separation

Y

Y

N

N

N

NA

Y

NA

Adaptator Layer

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Basic emplace support

Y

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Enhance emplace support

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Iterator support

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

N

Sort algorithm

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

N

Y

Enhanced Sort algorithm

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

N

Y

single linkage definition

N\*

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

Y

Full abstraction

Y

Y

N

Y

N

Y

Y

N

Contract violation checks

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Natural usage

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Basic type is stored

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

No explicit instanciation

Y

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

Y

prefixed function

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

memory handling

exception

abort, exception

retcode

retcode

none

retcode

retcode

retcode

destructors on exception

Y

Y\*

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

N

custom memory support

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

N

context for custom memory support

N

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Forward declaration support

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Serialization

N

JSON

N

N

N

N

N

N

*   C11\*: means C11 + extension
*   Y\*: Yes with some limitations.

Comparison programs

STL

M\*LIB

STC

CMC

CTL

CollectionsC

CC

GLIB

int:number of characters

236

370

558

1011

593

885

611

696

int:number of line of codes

12

16

28

36

22

35

31

36

int:number of workarounds

0

0

0

2

2

1

1

0

mpz:number of characters

261

500

1222

1740

1407

1337

1120

840

mpz:number of line of codes

13

18

37

52

37

58

40

45

mpz:number of workarounds

0

0

3

7

5

1

2

0

Containers

STL

M\*LIB

STC

CMC

CTL

CollectionsC

CC

GLIB

Singly Linked Non-Intrusive list

Y

Y

N

N

Y

Y

N

Y

Doubly Linked Non-Intrusive list

Y

N

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Singly Linked, Dualy Push Non-Intrusive list

N

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Singly Linked Intrusive list

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Doubly Linked Intrusive list

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Dynamic array

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Static array

Y

N

N

N

Y

N

N

N

pair

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

tuple

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

optional

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

variant

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Y

bitset

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

Dynamic character string

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

N

Y

string\_view

Y

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

deque

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

queue

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

priority queue

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

stack

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

N

N

Bounded Queue

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Y

set

Y

Y

Y

N

N

Y

N

Y

multiset

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

map

Y

Y

N

N

Y

Y

N

N

multimap

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

unordered\_set

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

unordered\_multiset

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

unordered\_map

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

unordered\_multimap

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

N

Y

flat\_set

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

flat\_multiset

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

flat\_map

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

flat\_multimap

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

unique\_ptr

Y

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

shared\_ptr

Y

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

advanced shared\_ptr

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

weak\_ptr

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Function Object

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Span

Y

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

MDSpan

Y

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Bounded String

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Atomic Shared Register SPSC

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Atomic Shared Register MPSC

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Atomic Shared Register SPMC

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Atomic Shared Register MPMC

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Skip List

N

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

Sorted Bidirectional Map

N

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

Tree

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

Algorithms

STL

M\*LIB

STC

CMC

CTL

CollectionsC

CC

GLIB

TODO

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

The used versions are:

COMPONENT

VERSION

GCC

10.2

C Macro Collections

v0.23.1

CollectionsC

ff1be366329e2c82cd85b2c803114ef8d2115f7f

CTL

3923e6776a231e5d58cf91225ca8a1d61879401b

M\*LIB

a0818419ab959e05517336e1bea699c1854b29f3

STC

5fb5ed08250b5ad4eadd6e7a9fdc44f4519b15ff

CC

2012d9d2eb8f035d7dc69f36ec03ca3199ede1bf

GLIB

2.74

*   [C-Macro-Collections](https://github.com/LeoVen/C-Macro-Collections)
*   [COLLECTIONS-C](https://github.com/srdja/Collections-C)
*   CTL [by glouw](https://github.com/glouw/ctl) or [by rurban](https://github.com/rurban/ctl)
*   [M\*LIB](https://github.com/P-p-H-d/mlib)
*   [STC - Smart Template Container for C](https://github.com/tylov/STC)
*   [CC](https://github.com/JacksonAllan/CC.git)
*   [GLIB](https://docs.gtk.org/glib/index.html)

This is a WIP, and some reviews are needed to help this comparison.

If you see any mistakes in this report, or want to include another C library, or want to include another point of comparison, do not hesitate to open a pull request.

# Benchmark

[](#benchmark)

The [bench](https://github.com/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/tree/master/bench) directory contains a small benchmark comparing the performance of different libraries. Results are available [here](https://github.com/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/wiki/Benchmark-result)

## About

Comparison of different C libraries providing generic containers capabilities

### Topics

[c](/topics/c "Topic: c") [stl](/topics/stl "Topic: stl") [data-structures](/topics/data-structures "Topic: data-structures") [collections](/topics/collections "Topic: collections")

### Resources

[Readme](#readme-ov-file)

### License

[BSD-2-Clause license](#BSD-2-Clause-1-ov-file)

### Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. Please reload this page.

[Activity](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/activity)

### Stars

[**33** stars](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/stargazers)

### Watchers

[**5** watching](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/watchers)

### Forks

[**5** forks](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/forks)

[Report repository](/contact/report-content?content_url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FP-p-H-d%2Fc-stl-comparison&report=P-p-H-d+%28user%29)

## [Releases](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/releases)

No releases published

### Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. Please reload this page.

## Languages

*   [C 60.7%](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/search?l=c)
*   [C++ 28.8%](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/search?l=c%2B%2B)
*   [Makefile 10.5%](/P-p-H-d/c-stl-comparison/search?l=makefile)

## Footer

[](https://github.com)© 2025 GitHub, Inc.

### Footer navigation

*   [Terms](https://docs.github.com/site-policy/github-terms/github-terms-of-service)
*   [Privacy](https://docs.github.com/site-policy/privacy-policies/github-privacy-statement)
*   [Security](https://github.com/security)
*   [Status](https://www.githubstatus.com/)
*   [Docs](https://docs.github.com/)
*   [Contact](https://support.github.com?tags=dotcom-footer)
*   Manage cookies
*   Do not share my personal information

You can’t perform that action at this time.