Fun with finite state transducers                                      

# ENOSUCHBLOG

## _Programming, philosophy, pedaling._

*   [Home](/)
*   [Tags](/tags)
*   [Series](/series)
*   [Favorites](/favorites)
*   [Archive](/archive)
*   [Main Site](https://yossarian.net)
*   [TILs](https://yossarian.net/til)

* * *

# [Fun with finite state transducers](/2025/08/14/Fun-with-finite-state-transducers)

## 

_Aug 14, 2025_     Tags: [devblog](/tags#devblog), [programming](/tags#programming), [rust](/tags#rust), [zizmor](/tags#zizmor)    

* * *

I recently[1](#fn:recently) solved an interesting problem inside [`zizmor`](https://github.com/zizmorcore/zizmor) with a type of state machine/automaton I hadn’t used before: a [finite state transducer (FST)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_transducer).

This is just a quick write-up of the problem and how I solved it. It doesn’t go particularly deep into the data structures themselves. For more information on FSTs themselves, I strongly recommend [burntsushi’s article on transducers](https://burntsushi.net/transducers/) (which is what actually led me to his [`fst`](https://crates.io/crates/fst) crate).

TL;DR: I used the [`fst`](https://crates.io/crates/fst) crate to build a finite state transducer that maps GitHub Actions _context patterns_ to their logical “capability” in the context of a potential template injection vulnerability. This ended up being an order of magnitude smaller in terms of representation (~14.5KB instead of ~240 KB) and faster and more memory efficient than my naïve initial approaches[2](#fn:perf) (tables and prefix trie walks). It also enabled me to fully precompute the FST at compile time, eliminating the startup cost of priming a trie- or table-based map.

## Background

[`zizmor`](https://github.com/zizmorcore/zizmor) is a static analysis tool for GitHub Actions.

One of the categories of weaknesses it can find is [_template injections_](https://docs.zizmor.sh/audits/#template-injection), wherein the CI author uses a [_GitHub Actions expression_](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/expressions) in a shell or similar context without realizing that the expression can escape any shell-level quoting intended to “defuse” it.

Here’s an example, derived from a pattern that gets [exploited](/2024/12/06/zizmor-ultralytics-injection) [over](https://www.praetorian.com/blog/pwn-request-hacking-microsoft-github-repositories-and-more/) [and over](https://www.wiz.io/blog/github-actions-security-guide) [again](https://www.sysdig.com/blog/insecure-github-actions-found-in-mitre-splunk-and-other-open-source-repositories):

```
1
2
3
- name: "Print the current ref"
  run: |
    echo "The current ref is: ${{ github.ref }}"
```

If this step is part of a workflow that grants elevated privileges to third parties (like `pull_request_target`), and attacker can contrive a `git` ref that escapes the shell quoting and runs arbitrary code.

For example, the following ref:

```
1
innocent";cat${IFS}/etc/passwd;true${IFS}"
```

…would expand[3](#fn:expand) as:

```
1
echo "The current ref is innocent";cat /etc/passwd;true ""
```

Fortunately, `zizmor` detects these:

```
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
zizmor hackme.yml

error[template-injection]: code injection via template expansion
  --> hackme.yml:15:41
   |
14 |         run: |
   |         ^^^ this run block
15 |           echo "The current ref is: ${{ github.ref }}"
   |                                         ^^^^^^^^^^ may expand into attacker-controllable code
   |
   = note: audit confidence → High
   = note: this finding has an auto-fix
```

## The problem

There’s a very simple way to detect these vulnerabilities: we could walk every code “sink” in a given workflow (e.g. `run:` blocks, action inputs that are known to contain code, &c.) and look for the fences of an expression (`${{ ... }}`). If we see those fences, we know that the contents are a potential injection risk.

This is appealing for reasons of simplicity, but is unacceptably _noisy_:

*   There are many actions expressions that are trivially safe, or non-trivial but deductively safe:
    
    *   Literals, e.g. `${{ true }}` or `${{ 'lol' }}`;
    *   Any expression that can only expand to a literal:
        
        ```
        1
        2
        3
        # only ever expands to 'main' or 'not-main'
        # despite using the github.ref context
        ${{ github.ref == 'main' && 'main' || 'not-main' }}
        ```
        
    *   Any expression that can’t expand to meaningful code, e.g. due to the expression’s type:
        
        ```
        1
        2
        3
        4
        5
        # only ever expands to a number
        ${{ github.run_number }}
        
        # only ever expands to `true` or `false`
        ${{ github.ref == 'main' }}
        ```
        
*   There are many expressions that can _appear_ unsafe by virtue of dataflow or context expansion, but are actually safe because of the context’s underlying type or constraints:
    
    *   `${{ github.event.pull_request.merged }}` is populated by GitHub’s backend and can only expand to `true` or `false`, but requires us to know _a priori_ that it’s a “safe” context;
    *   `${{ github.actor }}` is an arbitrary string, but is limited in _structure_ to characters that make it infeasible to perform a useful injection with (no semicolons, `$`, &c.).

`zizmor` generally aims to present low-noise findings, so filtering these out by default is paramount.

The first group is pretty easy: we can do a small amount of dataflow analysis to determine whether an expression’s evaluation is “tainted” by arbitrary controllable inputs.

The second group is harder, because it requires to know additional facts about arbitrary-looking contexts. The two main facts we care about are _type_ (whether a context expands to a string, a number, or something else) and _capability_ (whether the expansion is fully arbitrary, or constrained in some manner that might make it safe or at least less risky). In practice these both collapse down to _capability_, since we can categorize certain types (e.g. booleans and numbers) as inherently safe.

## Fact finding

So, what we want is a way to collect facts about _every valid_ GitHub Actions context.

The trick to this lies in remembering that, under the hood, GitHub Actions is driven by GitHub’s [webhooks API](https://docs.github.com/en/webhooks/about-webhooks): most[4](#fn:most) of the context state loaded into a GitHub Actions workflow run is derived from the [webhook payload](https://docs.github.com/en/webhooks/webhook-events-and-payloads) corresponding to the event that triggered the workflow.

So, how do we get a list of _all_ valid contexts along with information about their expansion? GitHub doesn’t provide this directly, but we can derive it from their [OpenAPI specification for the webhooks API](https://github.com/octokit/openapi-webhooks).

This comes in the form of a [~4.5MB OpenAPI schema](https://github.com/octokit/openapi-webhooks/blob/main/packages/openapi-webhooks/generated/api.github.com.json), which is pain in the ass to work with directly[5](#fn:pita): it’s both heavily self-referential (by necessity, since an “unrolled” version with inline schemas for each property would infeasibly large), is heavily telescoped (also by necessity, since GitHub’s API responses themselves are not particularly flat), _and_ makes ample use of OpenAPI constructions like `oneOf`, `anyOf`, and `allOf` that require careful additional handling.

At the bottom of all of this, however, is our reward: detailed information about every property provided by each webhook event, including the property’s type _and_ valuable information about how the property is constrained.

For example, here’s the schema for a `pull_request.state` property:

```
1
2
3
4
5
6
"state": {
    "description": "State of this Pull Request. Either `open` or `closed`.",
    "enum": ["open", "closed"],
    "type": "string",
    "examples": ["open"]
}
```

This tells us that `pull_request.state` is a string, **but** that its value is constrained to either `open` or `closed`. We categorize this as having a “fixed” capability, since we know that the attacker can’t control the structure of the value _itself_ in a meaningful way.

Long story short: this is implemented as a helper script within `zizmor` called [`webhooks-to-contexts.py`](https://github.com/zizmorcore/zizmor/blob/42b0346d8a2bc64cd9be7bb96ef703df69f3dedc/support/webhooks-to-contexts.py). This script is run periodically in GitHub Actions and walks the OpenAPI scheme to produces a CSV, `context-capabilities.csv`, that looks like this:

context

capability

github.event.pull\_request.active\_lock\_reason

arbitrary

github.event.pull\_request.additions

fixed

github.event.pull\_request.allow\_auto\_merge

fixed

github.event.pull\_request.allow\_update\_branch

fixed

github.event.pull\_request.assignee

fixed

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.avatar\_url

structured

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.deleted

fixed

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.email

arbitrary

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.events\_url

arbitrary

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.followers\_url

structured

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.following\_url

arbitrary

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.gists\_url

arbitrary

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.gravatar\_id

arbitrary

github.event.pull\_request.assignee.html\_url

structured

…to the tune of about 4000 unique[6](#fn:unique) contexts.

## The bigger problem

So, we have a few thousand contexts, each with a capability that tells us how much of a risk that context poses in terms of template injection. We can just shove these into a map and call it a day, right?

**Wrong.** We’ve glossed over a significant wrinkle, which is that context accesses in GitHub Actions are _not themselves_ always literal. Instead, they can be _patterns_ that can _expand_ to multiple values.

A good example of this is `github.event.pull_request.labels`: `labels` is an _array of objects_, each of which has a `name` property corresponding to the label’s actual name. To access these, we can use syntaxes that select individual labels or all labels:

```
1
2
3
4
5
# access the first label's name
github.event.pull_request.labels[0].name

# access all labels' names
github.event.pull_request.labels.*.name
```

In both cases, we want to apply the same capability to the context’s expansion. To make things even more complicated exciting, GitHub’s own context access syntax is surprisingly malleable: each of the following is a valid _and equivalent_ way to access the first label’s name:

```
1
2
3
4
5
github.event.pull_request.labels[0].name
github.EVENT.PULL_REQUEST.LABELS[0].NAME
github['event']['pull_request']['labels'][0]['name']
github['event'].pull_request['labels'][0].name
github.event.pULl_ReQUEst['LaBEls'][0].nAmE
```

..and so forth.

In sum, we have two properties that blow a hole in our “just shove it in a map” approach:

1.  Contexts are _patterned_, and can’t be expanded into a static finite enumeration of simplified contexts. For example, we can’t know how many labels a repository has[7](#fn:offline), so we can’t statically unfold the `github.event.pull_request.labels.*.name` context into `N` contexts that match everything the user might write in a workflow.
2.  Contexts can be expressed through multiple syntaxes. We can keep things simple on the capability extraction side by only using the `jq`\-ish syntax, but we still need to normalize any contexts as they appear in workflows. This is not very difficult, but it makes a single map lookup even less appealing.

## The solution

To recap:

*   We have a few thousands contexts, each of which is really a _pattern_ that can match one or more “concrete” context usages as they appear in a user’s workflow.
*   Each of these context patterns has an associated capability, as one of `fixed | structured | arbitrary`, indicating how much of a risk the context poses in terms of template injection.
*   Our goal is to **efficiently match** these patterns against the contexts as they appear in a user’s workflow, and return the associated capability.

To me, this originally smacked of a prefix/radix trie problem: there are a a large number of common prefixes/segments in the pattern set, meaning that the trie could be made relatively compact. However, tries are optimized for operations that the problem doesn’t require:

*   Tries are optimized to grow and shrink at runtime, but we don’t need that: the set of context patterns is static, and we’d ideally trade off some compile-time cost for runtime size and speed.
*   Tries can perform efficient prefix and exact matches, but (typically) at the cost of a larger runtime memory footprint.

Finally, on a more practical level: I couldn’t find a great trie/radix trie crate to use. Some of this might have been a discovery failure on my part, but I couldn’t find one that was already widely used _and_ still actively maintained. [`radix_tree`](https://crates.io/crates/radix_trie) came the closest, but hasn’t been updated in nearly 5 years.

While reading about other efficient prefix representation structures, I came across [DAFSAs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deterministic_acyclic_finite_state_automaton) (also sometimes called DAWGs). These offer a significantly more compact representation of prefixes than a trie, but at a cost: unlike a trie, a DAFSA cannot contain auxiliary data. This makes them great for _inclusion_ checking (including of prefixes), but not so great for my purpose of storing each pattern’s associated capability.

That brought me to _transducers_ as a class of finite state machines: unlike _acceptors_ (DAFSAs, but also normal DFAs and NFAs) that map from an input sequence to a boolean accept/reject state, _transducers_ map an input sequence to an output sequence. That output sequence can then be composed (e.g. via summation) into an output value. In effect, the “path” an input takes through the transducer yields an output value.

In this way, FSTs can behave a lot like a _map_ (whether backed by a prefix trie or a hash table), but with some appealing additional properties:

*   A finite state transducer can compress its _entire_ input, unlike a prefix trie (which only compresses the prefixes). That means a more compact representation.
*   A finite state transducer can share duplicated output values across inputs, unlike a prefix trie or hash table (which would store the same output value multiple times). This also means a more compact representation, and is particularly appealing in our case as we only have a small set of possible capabilities.

These desirable properties come with downsides too: _optimal_ FST construction requires memory proportional to the total input size, and requires ordered insertion of each input. Modifications to an FST are also limited: optimal insertions must be ordered, while deletions or changes to an associated value require a full rebuild of the FST. In practice, this that FST construction is a static affair over a preprocessed input set. But that’s perfectly fine for my use case!

## Putting it together

As it turns out, using the [`fst`](https://crates.io/crates/fst) crate to construct an FST at build time is pretty simple. Here’s the totality of the code that I put in `build.rs` to transform `context-capabilities.csv`:

```
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
fn do_context_capabilities() {
    let manifest_dir = env::var("CARGO_MANIFEST_DIR").unwrap();
    let source = Path::new(&manifest_dir).join("data/context-capabilities.csv");

    println!(
        "cargo::rerun-if-changed={source}",
        source = source.display()
    );

    let out_dir = env::var("OUT_DIR").unwrap();
    let out_path = Path::new(&out_dir).join("context-capabilities.fst");

    let out = io::BufWriter::new(File::create(out_path).unwrap());
    let mut build = fst::MapBuilder::new(out).unwrap();

    let mut rdr = csv::ReaderBuilder::new()
        .has_headers(false)
        .from_path(source)
        .unwrap();

    for record in rdr.records() {
        let record = record.unwrap();
        let context = record.get(0).unwrap();
        let capability = match record.get(1).unwrap() {
            "arbitrary" => 0,
            "structured" => 1,
            "fixed" => 2,
            _ => panic!("Unknown capability"),
        };

        build.insert(context, capability).unwrap();
    }

    build.finish().unwrap();
}
```

…and then, loading and querying it:

```
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
static CONTEXT_CAPABILITIES_FST: LazyLock<Map<&[u8]>> = LazyLock::new(|| {
    fst::Map::new(include_bytes!(concat!(env!("OUT_DIR"), "/context-capabilities.fst")).as_slice())
        .expect("couldn't initialize context capabilities FST")
});


impl Capability {
    fn from_context(context: &str) -> Option<Self> {
        match CONTEXT_CAPABILITIES_FST.get(context) {
            Some(0) => Some(Capability::Arbitrary),
            Some(1) => Some(Capability::Structured),
            Some(2) => Some(Capability::Fixed),
            Some(_) => unreachable!("unexpected context capability"),
            _ => None,
        }
    }
}
```

(where the input `context` has been normalized, e.g. from `github["event"]["pull_request"]["title"]` to `github.event.pull_request.title`).

## Concluding thoughts

Everything above was included in [zizmor 1.9.0](https://docs.zizmor.sh/release-notes/#190), as part of a large-scale refactor of the [template-injection](https://docs.zizmor.sh/audits/#template-injection) audit.

Was this overkill? Probably: I only have about ~4000 valid context patterns, which would have comfortably fit into a hash table.

However, using an FST for this makes the footprint _ludicrously and satisfyingly small_: each pattern takes less than 4 bytes to represent in the serialized FST, well below the roughly linear memory footprint of loading the equivalent data from `context-capabilities.csv`.

Using an FST also unlocked future optimizations ideas that I haven’t bothered to experiment with yet:

*   The FST is currently searched using a normalization of each context as it appears in a workflow. However, FSTs can be searched by any DFA, meaning that I could _in theory_ convert each context into a regular expression instead. I’m unclear on whether this would bring a performance advantage, since the context-to-regex-to-DFA conversion itself is not necessarily cheap.
*   In principle, the FST’s size could be squeezed down even further by splitting the context patterns into _segments_, rather than decomposing into sequences of bytes. This comes from the observation that many vertices in the FST are shared and singular, meaning that they only have one incoming edge and one outgoing edge. I don’t think the [`fst`](https://crates.io/crates/fst) crate supports this natively, but it would yield the prefix deduplication benefits of a prefix trie while still preserving the compression benefits of an FST.

* * *

1.  A few months ago. [↩](#fnref:recently)
    
2.  Spoiler: I didn’t bother benchmarking this at the time. [↩](#fnref:perf)
    
3.  I’ve replaced `${IFS}` with a single literal space for readability. [↩](#fnref:expand)
    
4.  But not all: the `runner.*` and `secrets.*` namespaces, for example, are populated by the GitHub Actions runner itself. [↩](#fnref:most)
    
5.  I can only assume that these kinds of huge generated schemas are actually useful to others. I think I’ve yet to encounter a JSON or OpenAPI schema that actually made my task at hand easier. [↩](#fnref:pita)
    
6.  There are significantly more _possible_ contexts than these, but most are overlapping. For example, `github.event.before` is shared across all webhook types. In theory we expect these variants of the same context to converge on the same capability — `github.event.before` shouldn’t really change type or structure with the webhook type. However, we can’t _guarantee_ that, so in practice we _unify_ duplicate contexts into their “strongest” capability: `(fixed, structured)` becomes `structured`, for example. This is conceptually an overapproximation, but whatever. [↩](#fnref:unique)
    
7.  At least, not without breaking out “offline first” policy. Plus, there are other resources whose cardinality GitHub won’t easily tell us. [↩](#fnref:offline)
    

* * *

[Previously](/2025/06/17/a-new-adventure)