Hardening systemd Services | John's Blog                

[blog.jlcarveth.dev](/)

# Hardening systemd Services

2025-07-11

By John L. Carveth

My love for `systemd` is no secret, I've blogged about it more than once. I especially love systemd's ability to _harden_ services. What does this mean exactly? Systemd offers a wealth of [directives](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.exec.html) that can restrict a service's access to files, syscalls, or even the network. This gives me peace of mind, knowing that even if the software running in the service has a vulnerability, the rest of the system stays protected.

# [](#the-hardening-loop)The Hardening Loop

Hardening a systemd service isn't a one-shot task. It's an iterative process:

1.  Add one (or a few) directives to your `.service` file.
2.  Reload the systemd daemon and restart your service

```
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl restart example.service
```

1.  Verify the service still works.
2.  Repeat until the service is satisfactorily locked down.

# [](#the-security-score)The Security Score

There is an optional step between 3) and 4): using `systemd-analyze security <service-name>`. This command displays a table showing various directives, whether they've been applied to your service, and the potential security score improvement if a directive has yet to be applied. At the bottom of this output, you will see the total score for your service. Lower is better.

# [](#why-bother)Why Bother?

Without hardening our services, a compromised service can become a gateway for attackers. Imagine a web server with a remote code execution flaw: if the service runs with full privilleges, an attacker could read sensitive files, modify system configurations, or even spread to other machines on the network.

But with proper hardening we gain:

*   Filesystem isolation
*   Network isolation
*   System call filtering

With hardened systemd services, we can more effectively contain potential breaches.

© 2025 John L. Carveth