Happy 100000th birthday, Debian        

* * *

    \[[Date Prev](msg00005.html)\]\[[Date Next](msg00007.html)\] \[[Thread Prev](msg00005.html)\]\[[Thread Next](msg00007.html)\] \[[Date Index](maillist.html#00006)\] \[[Thread Index](threads.html#00006)\]

# Happy 100000th birthday, Debian

* * *

*   _To_: Debian Developers <[debian-devel-announce@lists.debian.org](mailto:debian-devel-announce%40lists.debian.org)\>
*   _Subject_: Happy 100000th birthday, Debian
*   _From_: Andreas Tille <[tille@debian.org](mailto:tille%40debian.org)\>
*   _Date_: Sat, 16 Aug 2025 06:20:44 +0200
*   _Message-id_: <[\[🔎\]](/msgid-search/aKAHHO30ZhM7zz4v@an3as.eu) [aKAHHO30ZhM7zz4v@an3as.eu](msg00006.html)\>
*   _Mail-followup-to_: [debian-devel@lists.debian.org](mailto:debian-devel%40lists.debian.org)

* * *

Dear Debian community,
 
Today we celebrate Debian’s 100000th birthday!
 
Before you start wondering about that age — yes, that’s 100000 in
binary, or 0x20 years in hexadecimal. And as we all know, round numbers
simply look cooler. ;-)  Debian was founded on 1993-08-16, which
makes today our 0x20 anniversary.
 
Over those 0x20 years, many of you have contributed — some for a short
time, others for much longer — helping Debian grow from a small project
into a global effort producing one of the largest and most widely used
Free Software distributions in the world. We’ve packaged software for
everything from tiny embedded devices to massive clusters, while staying
true to our Social Contract and the principles of Free Software.
 
This wouldn’t have been possible without the dedication and
collaboration of our contributors and users worldwide. Thank you all for
making Debian what it is today.
 
Just last week we saw the latest result of our collective work — the
Trixie release. My warm thanks go out to all involved teams:
 - the FTPMaster team for their reliable work,
 - the Release team for coordinating the whole release process,
 - the Installer team for enabling Debian on diverse hardware,
 - the Images team for creating the bootable images,
 - the Press team for shouting the news to the world,
 - the many developers fixing RC bugs during the release process,
 - the developers who created documentation for the release process,
 - and the countless translators enabling Debian to be used by
   people all over the globe.
And, of course, to everyone I may have missed in this list who did
important work to make Trixie the great release it is.
 
A particular thank-you also goes to Ansgar for addressing issues with
the code-signing service and unblocking work on upcoming Linux DSAs.
 
Let’s celebrate today — and then enjoy the freedom to upload to unstable
again, aiming for an even greater Forky release.
 
Yours,
   Andreas.

**Attachment: [signature.asc](pgpHyQaVU5u1F.pgp)**  
_Description:_ PGP signature

* * *

**Reply to:**

*   [debian-devel-announce@lists.debian.org](mailto:debian-devel-announce@lists.debian.org?in-reply-to=<aKAHHO30ZhM7zz4v@an3as.eu>&subject=Re:%20Happy 100000th birthday, Debian)
*   [Andreas Tille (on-list)](mailto:tille@debian.org?in-reply-to=<aKAHHO30ZhM7zz4v@an3as.eu>&subject=Re:%20Happy 100000th birthday, Debian&cc=debian-devel-announce@lists.debian.org)
*   [Andreas Tille (off-list)](mailto:tille@debian.org?in-reply-to=<aKAHHO30ZhM7zz4v@an3as.eu>&subject=Re:%20Happy 100000th birthday, Debian)

* * *

*   Prev by Date: **[Try Debusine for your next upload to unstable!](msg00005.html)**
*   Next by Date: **[Updating the FTP Master delegation](msg00007.html)**
*   Previous by thread: **[Try Debusine for your next upload to unstable!](msg00005.html)**
*   Next by thread: **[Updating the FTP Master delegation](msg00007.html)**
*   Index(es):
    *   [**Date**](maillist.html#00006)
    *   [**Thread**](threads.html#00006)