.:: Phrack Magazine ::.  

\[ [News](/index.html "News") \] \[ [Issues](/issues/72/1.html "Issues") \] \[ [Authors](/authors.html "Authors") \] \[ [Archives](/archives/ "Archives") \] \[ [Contact](/contact.html "Contact") \]

  
  
![..[ Phrack Magazine ]..](/images/phracklogo.jpg)  

.:: Introduction ::.

* * *

**Issues**: \[ [1](/issues/1/1.html "Issue 1") \] \[ [2](/issues/2/1.html "Issue 2") \] \[ [3](/issues/3/1.html "Issue 3") \] \[ [4](/issues/4/1.html "Issue 4") \] \[ [5](/issues/5/1.html "Issue 5") \] \[ [6](/issues/6/1.html "Issue 6") \] \[ [7](/issues/7/1.html "Issue 7") \] \[ [8](/issues/8/1.html "Issue 8") \] \[ [9](/issues/9/1.html "Issue 9") \] \[ [10](/issues/10/1.html "Issue 10") \] \[ [11](/issues/11/1.html "Issue 11") \] \[ [12](/issues/12/1.html "Issue 12") \] \[ [13](/issues/13/1.html "Issue 13") \] \[ [14](/issues/14/1.html "Issue 14") \] \[ [15](/issues/15/1.html "Issue 15") \] \[ [16](/issues/16/1.html "Issue 16") \] \[ [17](/issues/17/1.html "Issue 17") \] \[ [18](/issues/18/1.html "Issue 18") \] \[ [19](/issues/19/1.html "Issue 19") \] \[ [20](/issues/20/1.html "Issue 20") \] \[ [21](/issues/21/1.html "Issue 21") \] \[ [22](/issues/22/1.html "Issue 22") \] \[ [23](/issues/23/1.html "Issue 23") \] \[ [24](/issues/24/1.html "Issue 24") \] \[ [25](/issues/25/1.html "Issue 25") \] \[ [26](/issues/26/1.html "Issue 26") \] \[ [27](/issues/27/1.html "Issue 27") \] \[ [28](/issues/28/1.html "Issue 28") \] \[ [29](/issues/29/1.html "Issue 29") \] \[ [30](/issues/30/1.html "Issue 30") \] \[ [31](/issues/31/1.html "Issue 31") \] \[ [32](/issues/32/1.html "Issue 32") \] \[ [33](/issues/33/1.html "Issue 33") \] \[ [34](/issues/34/1.html "Issue 34") \] \[ [35](/issues/35/1.html "Issue 35") \] \[ [36](/issues/36/1.html "Issue 36") \] \[ [37](/issues/37/1.html "Issue 37") \] \[ [38](/issues/38/1.html "Issue 38") \] \[ [39](/issues/39/1.html "Issue 39") \] \[ [40](/issues/40/1.html "Issue 40") \] \[ [41](/issues/41/1.html "Issue 41") \] \[ [42](/issues/42/1.html "Issue 42") \] \[ [43](/issues/43/1.html "Issue 43") \] \[ [44](/issues/44/1.html "Issue 44") \] \[ [45](/issues/45/1.html "Issue 45") \] \[ [46](/issues/46/1.html "Issue 46") \] \[ [47](/issues/47/1.html "Issue 47") \] \[ [48](/issues/48/1.html "Issue 48") \] \[ [49](/issues/49/1.html "Issue 49") \] \[ [50](/issues/50/1.html "Issue 50") \] \[ [51](/issues/51/1.html "Issue 51") \] \[ [52](/issues/52/1.html "Issue 52") \] \[ [53](/issues/53/1.html "Issue 53") \] \[ [54](/issues/54/1.html "Issue 54") \] \[ [55](/issues/55/1.html "Issue 55") \] \[ [56](/issues/56/1.html "Issue 56") \] \[ [57](/issues/57/1.html "Issue 57") \] \[ [58](/issues/58/1.html "Issue 58") \] \[ [59](/issues/59/1.html "Issue 59") \] \[ [60](/issues/60/1.html "Issue 60") \] \[ [61](/issues/61/1.html "Issue 61") \] \[ [62](/issues/62/1.html "Issue 62") \] \[ [63](/issues/63/1.html "Issue 63") \] \[ [64](/issues/64/1.html "Issue 64") \] \[ [65](/issues/65/1.html "Issue 65") \] \[ [66](/issues/66/1.html "Issue 66") \] \[ [67](/issues/67/1.html "Issue 67") \] \[ [68](/issues/68/1.html "Issue 68") \] \[ [69](/issues/69/1.html "Issue 69") \] \[ [70](/issues/70/1.html "Issue 70") \] \[ [71](/issues/71/1.html "Issue 71") \] \[ [72](/issues/72/1.html "Issue 72") \]

[Get tar.gz](/archives/tgz/phrack72.tar.gz "Get current issue tar.gz")

**Current issue** : #[72](/archives/tgz/phrack72.tar.gz "Get current issue tar.gz") | **Release date** : **date: 2025-08-19** | **Editor** : **author: Phrack Staff**

[Introduction](/issues/72/1_md.html#article)

Phrack Staff

[Phrack Prophile on Gera](/issues/72/2.html#article)

Phrack Staff

[Linenoise](/issues/72/3_md.html#article)

Phrack Staff

[Loopback](/issues/72/4_md.html#article)

Phrack Staff

[The Art of PHP - My CTF Journey and Untold Stories!](/issues/72/5_md.html#article)

Orange Tsai

[Guarding the PHP Temple](/issues/72/6_md.html#article)

mr\_me

[APT Down - The North Korea Files](/issues/72/7_md.html#article)

Saber, cyb0rg

[A learning approach on exploiting CVE-2020-9273](/issues/72/8_md.html#article)

dukpt

[Mapping IOKit Methods Exposed to User Space on macOS](/issues/72/9_md.html#article)

Karol Mazurek

[Popping an alert from a sandboxed WebAssembly module](/issues/72/10_md.html#article)

th0mas.nl

[Desync the Planet - Rsync RCE](/issues/72/11_md.html#article)

Simon, Pedro, Jasiel

[Quantom ROP](/issues/72/12_md.html#article)

Yoav Shifman, Yahav Rahom

[Revisiting Similarities of Android Apps](/issues/72/13_md.html#article)

Jakob Bleier, Martina Lindorfer

[Money for Nothing, Chips for Free](/issues/72/14_md.html#article)

Peter Honeyman

[E0 - Selective Symbolic Instrumentation](/issues/72/15_md.html#article)

Jex Amro

[Roadside to Everyone](/issues/72/16_md.html#article)

Jon Gaines

[A CPU Backdoor](/issues/72/17_md.html#article)

uty

[The Feed Is Ours](/issues/72/18_md.html#article)

tgr

[The Hacker's Renaissance - A Manifesto Reborn](/issues/72/19.html#article)

TMZ

**Title** : Introduction

**Author** : Phrack Staff

                              ==Phrack Inc.==

                Volume 0x10, Issue 0x48, Phile #0x01 of 0x12

|=-----------------------------------------------------------------------=|
|=-------------------------=\[ Introduction \]=----------------------------=|
|=-----------------------------------------------------------------------=|
|=----------------------=\[    Phrack Staff    \]=-------------------------=|
|=-----------------------=\[ [\[email protected\]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection) \]=--------------------------=|
|=-----------------------------------------------------------------------=|
|=----------------------=\[  August  19, 2025  \]=-------------------------=|
|=-----------------------------------------------------------------------=|

    \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_    \_\_\_\_\_\_\_     \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  \_\_\_\_\_   \_\_\_\_\_
 .\_\\\\\_\_\_\_  \\\\   |    |\_\_\\\\\_\_    \\  \_\\\\\_\_   /\\    \_\_//\_\\    | /    /
 :    |/   >>   :    :    :/    /./    /    |    |   /.    !/    /
 |    :    /         |    /     \\|    \_\_    |    |    |    /     \\
 |    \_\_\_\_/|    |    |    \\      \\     |    |\_\_  :    |    \\      \\
 |    |/// |\_\_\_\_|    |\_\_\_\_\_\\     |\\\_\_\_ |    ://\\      !\_\_\_\_\_\\      \\
 |    :    /////:\_\_\_\_|/////\\\\\_\_\_\_|////\\\\\_\_\_/.   \\\\\_\_\_\_://///\\\\\_\_\_\_\_/
 |\_\_\_/ e-zine   /////:     //////|     ////      /////       //////
 ////                .           :                x0^67^aMi5H^iMP!


--\[ Hacker Evolution 


For 40 years, Phrack has published papers that have reflected and shaped 
hacker culture. The knowledge shared in Phrack has laid the foundation for
many fields of study, providing insight, a shared language, resources 
and tools, as well as context and history. Phrack is written by hackers, 
for hackers, and offers a glimpse into the world just beyond what most 
people see.


Phrack is both a technical journal and a cultural document. Like all zines, 
it represents a snapshot of the scene at the time. We share not just our 
discoveries, but the stories of how we came to know things and the context 
in which we existed. We share our triumphs, failures, and lessons learned. 
By fostering a culture of communal idea sharing, we learn how to solve 
problems creatively, and make the most of our current situation. 


Over the past 40 years, hacking has evolved, splintered, and mutated into 
a variety of forms. Phrack has documented many of the key innovations in 
hacking since its first issue: From showcasing ways to manipulate the phone 
system and other large computers, to pioneering vulnerability scanning, to 
generalizing security concepts such as buffer overflows, ROP, and heap 
exploitation, to bringing it all together within complex ecosystems that 
seemed like just a fantasy in years past. Each generation builds off the 
previous and offers us new perspectives, remixing with older ideas and 
demonstrating how they can be reapplied to new situations. When Phrack was 
first published in the mid-80s, our relationship with technology was quite 
different. Many of our challenges involved simply getting and staying 
online. Today we face entirely new challenges based on what is, what was, 
and what will be.


The hacker ethos remains the same - be curious about your world, make do 
with what you have, and show how things can be better.


What was done before us, and the knowledge shared, provides the base for 
us to build off of and evolve from. As hackers, we pass on our best 
characteristics by teaching others. We document how and why we did things
based on what was available at the time. We expand on previous generations'
work and piece together our own understanding, informed by our own personal 
experience. The reward is the beauty of what we discover and create, and
the joy of sharing and inspiring others. Over time, all of our most beloved 
and reliable techniques and tools become common knowledge, and new 
permutations pop up. As circumstances change, so do our needs. What's old
becomes new again, new ideas recontextualize the old. The cycle continues.


Knowledge is the hacker DNA. Our instincts and curiosity are complimented 
by the stories of how things were accomplished before. Like hackers and 
humans before us, we adapt to our environment, and figure out how to meet
our needs and achieve our goals. As technology becomes more optimized and 
abstracted, it can be easy to lose track of the fundamentals. Just because 
tech has evolved doesn't mean the foundation has changed. We still use AT 
commands to control our modems. We still activate the A20 line to access
memory beyond 1MB on x86 CPUs. In-band signaling is still a pathway into 
the toughest systems. Weird machines still manifest throughout it all, 
waiting to be discovered by a hacker like you.


Everything is in a state of flux, and the only constant is change. Yet, if 
we position ourselves correctly, our actions can influence the future. 
Things mutate. There are happy accidents. The world is chaos, and out of 
chaos emerges hackers.


Hacking has no choice but to evolve, and hacker zines like Phrack evolve
with it. We look back at our foundation for inspiration, while we also look
forward towards uncharted territory, unafraid of going beyond. We venture 
into the deepest darkest rabbit holes that few dare to tread, where we see 
the light that leads us to the most amazing treasures. We address the needs 
of our communities, find ways to grow together, and encourage each other
to keep exploring. We maintain projects like Phrack because it gives a 
platform for the unadulterated voice of the hacker. 


Humans are hackers. We were put here to figure things out. Hacking is an
innate skill to be tapped into and developed. The hacker spirit guides us 
through situations once thought hopeless. Hacking is a way to answer your 
own burning questions, a way to discover your own potential, and a way to 
create a world you want to live in.


There is a hacker born every day. It's our duty to share things that can
inform them of the past and present, and give them hope for a better 
tomorrow. After all, we're all alike.


--\[ Welcome to Phrack #72 

This edition is not just a milestone but a testament to the relentless
curiosity, stubborn brilliance, and uncompromising spirit of a global 
community that refuses to be silenced. A tribute to the old school and 
the new blood. To the legends who paved the way, and to those just 
starting to carve their path. It’s held together with tape, sweat, late 
nights, fried brains, and that twitchy love for the broken and beautiful 
mess of systems.

Huge thanks to every author who contributed their knowledge, tools, 
exploits, vision, and war stories. Your work keeps the scene alive 
and sharp.

To the reviewers and editors who read between the lines and asked the 
hard questions. You pushed for clarity without dulling the edge.

To the artists who dropped visuals, raw pixel filth, and clean design. 
You gave this issue texture. You made it feel.

To the layout crew who made this beast look like something worth 
printing in blood. Your work is proof that style and substance can 
coexist.

To everyone who tested drafts, pointed out typos, suggested better 
payloads, or tighter phrasing. You know who you are. We see you.

To the donors who pitched in to fund the printing of our anniversary 
edition. You helped keep this thing afloat, independent, and untamed.

And to the scene. The real one. You’re the reason we’re still doing 
this. This is yours.

A scream in a world that wants silence. A spark under a mountain of 
dead protocol.

Phrack lives because you do, so welcome to the noise and enjoy.

— Phrack Staff
ISSN 1068-1035


In this edition:

- 16 bangers from some of the sharpest minds in the scene

- A Prophile on the legendary Gera

- A puzzle to melt your brain (and flex your ego)

- A full-on CTF — win it and claim your Phrack coin!

- Visuals that hit like a payload: stunning GFX, ASCII and glitch art, 
  pure eye candy


--\[ Greetz

Phrack 72 would not have been possible without the incredible hacker scene 
coming together to help make it happen. Thank you to all the authors, 
artists, donors, editors, and logistics experts who made this historic 
issue and international release a reality.

Special thanks to our artists: ackmage, amnesia, aNACHRONiST, araknet, 
bubok arsonian, digitalis, fyodor, ic3qu33n, jinn, mar, mavenmob, netspooky, 
p0rtL, s01den, x0, ytcracker. 

Massive thanks to the Paged Out crew for their help making an incredible 
print layout.

This zine would not have been possible without the following people:

ackmage         -- minted the only coin in that'll be worth anything in 2026
bsdaemon        -- still carrying hackers forward
chompie         -- omg will u sign my driver?
clockwerk       -- l0ve
dark tengant    -- uber-supporter since dayZero
diaul           -- w0rd
horizon         -- ADM 4ever
Julio           -- The rise of the  alligatorzzzz
messede         -- <b>awesome</b>
netspooky       -- ultimate cyber skull
pinguino        -- all your news are belong to her
retr0id         -- switch 2, retr0id 1, day 0
richinseattle   -- keeper of the lore
sblip           -- whaddup blip
skyper          -- triplegänger
TMZ             -- just a chill guy
Phrack Staff    -- for holding it down
Phrack's Tariff -- we got PCBs at home


--\[ Phrack policy

phrack:~# head -77 /usr/include/std-disclaimer.h
/\*
 \*  All information in Phrack Magazine is, to the best of the ability of
 \*  the editors and contributors, truthful and accurate.  When possible,
 \*  all facts are checked, all code is compiled.  However, we are not
 \*  omniscient (hell, we don't even get paid).  It is entirely possible
 \*  something contained within this publication is incorrect in some way.
 \*  If this is the case, please drop us some email so that we can correct
 \*  it in a future issue.
 \*
 \*
 \*  Also, keep in mind that Phrack Magazine accepts no responsibility for
 \*  the entirely stupid (or illegal) things people may do with the
 \*  information contained herein.  Phrack is a compendium of knowledge,
 \*  wisdom, wit, and sass.  We neither advocate, condone nor participate
 \*  in any sort of illicit behavior.  But we will sit back and watch.
 \*
 \*
 \*  Lastly, it bears mentioning that the opinions that may be expressed in
 \*  the articles of Phrack Magazine are intellectual property of their
 \*  authors.
 \*  These opinions do not necessarily represent those of the Phrack Staff.
 \*/


--\[ Phrack 73 Call For Papers 

Why should you write for Phrack?

- You have a project you've been working on that pushes the limits in some 
  way, doing things that haven't been publicly shared before. If you do 
  cutting edge security research, you should write for Phrack.

- You are interested in aspects of security and technology that other people
  don't seem to care about or understand. If you feel like you need to shed
  light on a certain topic for all to see, you should write for Phrack.

- You keep seeing the same problems over and over and wish someone would 
  just write a straightforward guide for everyone. If you are the person 
  who can write that for now and future generations, you should write for 
  Phrack.

- You deserve a place to share your finest work without fear. If you don't
  want something you poured your heart and soul into turned into another 
  metric for shareholders and potential investors or trapped forever inside
  a corporate VPN, you should write for Phrack.

Worst Case Scenario: You just wrote a cool paper you can share on your own.

Best Case Scenario: Your paper gets published in Phrack. :)


::. What do we want? .::

Articles about hacking, exploit development, vulnerability research, and 
other fine topics.

More Specifically:  

- Exploitation: Demonstrate the latest techniques in breaking mitigations 
  and proving vulnerabilities still have bite.

- Persistence: Whether its userland, kernel, or below ring0, share a trick 
  in the dark art of stealth persistence.

- Fuzzing and Code Analysis: Automated bug hunting finds the low hanging 
  fruit, how can we make it more lethal?

- Binary Obfuscation: We have decompilers but custom VMs and powerful 
  transformations create impenetrable code.

- Data Obfuscation: Time to exfil, how do you move a terabyte of data 
  without looking like a fool?

- Anti-Forensics: Leave no trace, hide in the mist, or maybe even deploy 
  countermeasures on the parsers!

- Web Applications: Discuss confusion, bypass, and injection attacks on 
  the multi-headed hydra of modern applications.

- Cloud Security: Complexity and lack of visibility is the soft underbelly
  of cloud compute, discuss.

- Data Storage Weaknesses: If data theft is the end goal, let's talk about 
  all the leaks in storage infra and APIs. 

- Exploit Mitigation: Finding every bug is futile, how do we design more 
  secure systems to block these attacks?

- Malware Analysis: The world is covered in a diaspora of malware, flay 
  open the code and inspect the innards.

- Malware Defense: We wade in a pool of parasites attacking from every 
  angle, how do we block their vicious effects?

- Exotic Reverse Engineering: What are the corrupt hidden hands of power 
  in this electronic substrate?

- Scene History: Let us learn the often isolated tribal history that hasn't
  been written about before.

- Tales from the Crypt: Want to tell a personal story of a righteous hack?
  Maybe we'll believe you.


::. When Do We Want It By? .::

June 2026


::. When will Phrack 73 be released? .::

Summer 2026

                   ----( Contact )----

    <  Editors           : staff\[at\]phrack{dot}org         >
    >  Submissions       : submissions\[at\]phrack{dot}org   <
    <  /dev/urandom      : loopback\[at\]phrack{dot}org      >
    >  Arts & Leisure    : arts\[at\]phrack{dot}org          <
    <  Twitter/X         : phrack                          >
    >  Mastodon          : phrack\[at\]haunted{dot}computer  <
    <  BlueSky           : phrack{dot}org                  >


    The rules are simple:

    + 7-bit ASCII wrapped to 76 columns OR Markdown UTF-8
    + ANTISPAM in the subject line or face the Spam God and 
      walk backwards into hell

\[ [News](/index.html "News") \] \[ [Issues](/issues/72/1.html "Issues") \] \[ [Authors](/authors.html "Authors") \] \[ [Archives](/archives/ "Archives") \] \[ [Contact](/contact.html "Contact") \]

© Copyleft 1985-2025, Phrack Magazine.