GitHub - DrBubble/ArduinoOS: ArduinoOS - An Operating System for Arduino                                            

[Skip to content](#start-of-content)  

## Navigation Menu

Toggle navigation

[](/)

[Sign in](/login?return_to=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS)

Appearance settings

*   Product
    
    *   [
        
        GitHub Copilot
        
        Write better code with AI
        
        ](https://github.com/features/copilot)
    *   [
        
        GitHub Spark New
        
        Build and deploy intelligent apps
        
        ](https://github.com/features/spark)
    *   [
        
        GitHub Models New
        
        Manage and compare prompts
        
        ](https://github.com/features/models)
    *   [
        
        GitHub Advanced Security
        
        Find and fix vulnerabilities
        
        ](https://github.com/security/advanced-security)
    *   [
        
        Actions
        
        Automate any workflow
        
        ](https://github.com/features/actions)
    
    *   [
        
        Codespaces
        
        Instant dev environments
        
        ](https://github.com/features/codespaces)
    *   [
        
        Issues
        
        Plan and track work
        
        ](https://github.com/features/issues)
    *   [
        
        Code Review
        
        Manage code changes
        
        ](https://github.com/features/code-review)
    *   [
        
        Discussions
        
        Collaborate outside of code
        
        ](https://github.com/features/discussions)
    *   [
        
        Code Search
        
        Find more, search less
        
        ](https://github.com/features/code-search)
    
    Explore
    
    *   [Why GitHub](https://github.com/why-github)
    *   [All features](https://github.com/features)
    *   [Documentation](https://docs.github.com)
    *   [GitHub Skills](https://skills.github.com)
    *   [Blog](https://github.blog)
    
*   Solutions
    
    By company size
    
    *   [Enterprises](https://github.com/enterprise)
    *   [Small and medium teams](https://github.com/team)
    *   [Startups](https://github.com/enterprise/startups)
    *   [Nonprofits](/solutions/industry/nonprofits)
    
    By use case
    
    *   [DevSecOps](/solutions/use-case/devsecops)
    *   [DevOps](/solutions/use-case/devops)
    *   [CI/CD](/solutions/use-case/ci-cd)
    *   [View all use cases](/solutions/use-case)
    
    By industry
    
    *   [Healthcare](/solutions/industry/healthcare)
    *   [Financial services](/solutions/industry/financial-services)
    *   [Manufacturing](/solutions/industry/manufacturing)
    *   [Government](/solutions/industry/government)
    *   [View all industries](/solutions/industry)
    
    [View all solutions](/solutions)
    
*   Resources
    
    Topics
    
    *   [AI](/resources/articles/ai)
    *   [DevOps](/resources/articles/devops)
    *   [Security](/resources/articles/security)
    *   [Software Development](/resources/articles/software-development)
    *   [View all](/resources/articles)
    
    Explore
    
    *   [Learning Pathways](https://resources.github.com/learn/pathways)
    *   [Events & Webinars](https://resources.github.com)
    *   [Ebooks & Whitepapers](https://github.com/resources/whitepapers)
    *   [Customer Stories](https://github.com/customer-stories)
    *   [Partners](https://partner.github.com)
    *   [Executive Insights](https://github.com/solutions/executive-insights)
    
*   Open Source
    
    *   [
        
        GitHub Sponsors
        
        Fund open source developers
        
        ](/sponsors)
    
    *   [
        
        The ReadME Project
        
        GitHub community articles
        
        ](https://github.com/readme)
    
    Repositories
    
    *   [Topics](https://github.com/topics)
    *   [Trending](https://github.com/trending)
    *   [Collections](https://github.com/collections)
    
*   Enterprise
    
    *   [
        
        Enterprise platform
        
        AI-powered developer platform
        
        ](/enterprise)
    
    Available add-ons
    
    *   [
        
        GitHub Advanced Security
        
        Enterprise-grade security features
        
        ](https://github.com/security/advanced-security)
    *   [
        
        Copilot for business
        
        Enterprise-grade AI features
        
        ](/features/copilot/copilot-business)
    *   [
        
        Premium Support
        
        Enterprise-grade 24/7 support
        
        ](/premium-support)
    
*   [Pricing](https://github.com/pricing)

Search or jump to...

# Search code, repositories, users, issues, pull requests...

Search

Clear

[Search syntax tips](https://docs.github.com/search-github/github-code-search/understanding-github-code-search-syntax)

# Provide feedback

We read every piece of feedback, and take your input very seriously.

 Include my email address so I can be contacted

Cancel Submit feedback

# Saved searches

## Use saved searches to filter your results more quickly

Name  

Query 

To see all available qualifiers, see our [documentation](https://docs.github.com/search-github/github-code-search/understanding-github-code-search-syntax).

Cancel Create saved search

[Sign in](/login?return_to=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS)

[Sign up](/signup?ref_cta=Sign+up&ref_loc=header+logged+out&ref_page=%2F%3Cuser-name%3E%2F%3Crepo-name%3E&source=header-repo&source_repo=DrBubble%2FArduinoOS)

Appearance settings

Resetting focus

You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert

[DrBubble](/DrBubble) / **[ArduinoOS](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS)** Public

*   [Notifications](/login?return_to=%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS) You must be signed in to change notification settings
*   [Fork 2](/login?return_to=%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS)
*   [Star 34](/login?return_to=%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS)
    

ArduinoOS - An Operating System for Arduino

### License

[View license](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/license.txt)

[34 stars](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/stargazers) [2 forks](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/forks) [Branches](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/branches) [Tags](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/tags) [Activity](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/activity)

[Star](/login?return_to=%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS)

[Notifications](/login?return_to=%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS) You must be signed in to change notification settings

*   [Code](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS)
*   [Issues 1](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/issues)
*   [Pull requests 0](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/pulls)
*   [Actions](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/actions)
*   [Projects 0](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/projects)
*   [Security](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security)
    
    [](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security)
    
    [](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security)
    
    [](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security)
    
    [
    
    ### Uh oh!
    
    ](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security)
    
    [There was an error while loading.](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security) Please reload this page.
    
*   [Insights](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/pulse)

Additional navigation options

*   [Code](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS)
*   [Issues](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/issues)
*   [Pull requests](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/pulls)
*   [Actions](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/actions)
*   [Projects](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/projects)
*   [Security](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/security)
*   [Insights](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/pulse)

# DrBubble/ArduinoOS

  

 master

[Branches](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/branches)[Tags](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/tags)

[](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/branches)[](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/tags)

Go to file

Code

Open more actions menu

## Folders and files

Name

Name

Last commit message

Last commit date

## Latest commit

## History

[71 Commits](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/commits/master/)

[](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/commits/master/)

[ArduinoOS](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/tree/master/ArduinoOS "ArduinoOS")

[ArduinoOS](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/tree/master/ArduinoOS "ArduinoOS")

[.gitignore](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/.gitignore ".gitignore")

[.gitignore](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/.gitignore ".gitignore")

[ArduinoOS.sln](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/ArduinoOS.sln "ArduinoOS.sln")

[ArduinoOS.sln](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/ArduinoOS.sln "ArduinoOS.sln")

[README.md](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/README.md "README.md")

[README.md](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/README.md "README.md")

[license.txt](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/license.txt "license.txt")

[license.txt](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/blob/master/license.txt "license.txt")

View all files

## Repository files navigation

*   [README](#)
*   [License](#)

# ArduinoOS

[](#arduinoos)

ArduinoOS is an operating system for arduino which supports real multithreading, exceptions and hardware abstraction. The kernel of ArduinoOS is entirely written in assembly and C and optimized for minimal memory usage.

Max Threads on device (1 System Thread):  
Arduino Uno: 20 Threads  
Arduino Mega: 90 Threads

Example:

#include "KernelInitializer.h"

lock \*serialLock = GetLockObject();

void setup()
{
    Serial.begin(9600);
    KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel(mainThread);
}

void mainThread()
{
    InitTask(secondThread);
    InitTaskWithStackSize(wastingCpuThread, STACK\_SIZE\_SMALL);
    while (true)
    {
        try
        {
            throw(EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_NULL);
        }
        catch
        {
            AquireLock(serialLock);
            Serial.println("There was an Exception!");
            Serial.print("Error code: ");
            Serial.println(GetException());
            ReleaseLock(serialLock);
        }
        clearException();
        sleep(1000);
    }
}

void secondThread()
{
    while (true)
    {
        AquireLock(serialLock);
        Serial.println("Spam!");
        ReleaseLock(serialLock);
        sleep(1000);
    }
}

void wastingCpuThread()
{
    while (true)
    {
        // Nothing
    }
}

## Table of Contents

[](#table-of-contents)

1 [Setup](#id-Setup)  
2 [OS-Usage](#id-Usage)  
    2.1 [Basics](#id-Basics)  
        2.1.1 [Sleep](#id-Sleep)  
        2.1.2 [Create Thread](#id-Create-Thread)  
        2.1.3 [Operating System uptime](#id-Operating-System-uptime)  
        2.1.4 [Locks](#id-Locks)  
        2.1.5 [Exceptions](#id-Exceptions)  
            2.1.5.1 [Throw](#id-Throw)  
            2.1.5.2 [Try Catch](#id-Try-Catch)  
            2.1.5.3 [Derivation](#id-Derivation)  
            2.1.5.4 [Exception Codes](#id-Exception-Codes)  
    2.2 [Advanced](#id-Advanced)  
        2.2.1 [Error handling](#id-Error-handling)  
            2.2.1.1 [Kernel Panic](#id-Kernel-Panic)  
            2.2.1.2 [Free Memory](#id-Free-Memory)  
            2.2.1.3 [Free Stack](#id-Free-Stack)  
        2.2.2 [Stack](#id-Stack)  
        2.2.3 [Thread Arguments](#id-Thread-Arguments)  
        2.2.4 [Kernel Tick Period](#id-Kernel-Tick-Period)  
3 [Hardware abstraction](#id-Hardware-abstraction)  

## Setup

[](#setup)

*   Download the latest release.
*   Copy the ArduinoOS folder to Documents\\Arduino\\libraries
*   Add the ArduinoOS library (You probably have to restart the Visual Studio or the Arduino IDE)
    *   Visual Studio: Add Library -> User -> ArduinoOS
    *   Arduino Studio: Sketch -> Include Library -> ArduinoOS
*   Replace your main file with:

#include <KernelInitializer.h\>

void setup()
{
    KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel(mainThread);
}

void mainThread()
{

}

*   All code in the mainThread function will now be executed under the Operating System

## OS-Usage

[](#os-usage)

### Basics

[](#basics)

#### Sleep

[](#sleep)

In order to pause your programm you can use:

sleep(milliseconds);

Do not use `delay` since it does not allow the operating system to execute other tasks in the meanwhile and will block the thread for that time. That means `delay(500)` will block for 1 second if 2 Threads are running and for 2 seconds if 4 threads are running.

#### Create Thread

[](#create-thread)

With `InitTask` a new thread can be created.

Example:

void mainThread()
{
    InitTask(secondThread);
}

void secondThread()
{

}

#### Operating System uptime

[](#operating-system-uptime)

To get the uptime of the operating system use `getElapsedMilliseconds` or `getElapsedTicks`.

#### Locks

[](#locks)

In order to keep your application thread safe you can use locks. With locks you can prevent an other thread to access a variable, function, ... in an unsafe state.

Example for conflicting threads:

void mainThread()
{
    InitTask(thread2);
    while (true)
    {
        Serial.println("Thread1");
    }
}

void thread2()
{
    while (true)
    {
        Serial.println("Thread2");
    }
}

If you execute this code you will notice that it will output something strange like:

```
1hrThd2adTh
Tadea
T
eared1hrThd2adTh
Tadea
T
```

This is because while one thread is writing into the serial it will be interrupted by the other thread. In order to prevent this you can use locks. With the method `GetLockObject` you can create a instance of a lock object.

Example:

lock \*serialLock = GetLockObject();

With `AquireLock(serialLock)` you can now lock the object. To release it use `ReleaseLock(serialLock)`.

Example:

void setup()
{
    Serial.begin(9600);
    KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel(mainThread);
}

lock \*serialLock = GetLockObject();

void mainThread()
{
    InitTask(thread2);
    while (true)
    {
        AquireLock(serialLock);
        Serial.println("Thread1");
        ReleaseLock(serialLock);
    }
}

void thread2()
{
    while (true)
    {
        AquireLock(serialLock);
        Serial.println("Thread2");
        ReleaseLock(serialLock);
    }
}

The output will now be like expected:

```
Thread1
Thread2
Thread1
Thread2
```

#### Exceptions

[](#exceptions)

In order to make error handling more easy you can use exceptions. ArduinoOS provides simple integer based exceptions. To save memory there is no such thing as an error message. Uncaught exceptions will result in a [KernelPanic](#id-Kernel-Panic) with the error `KERNEL_ERROR_UNHANDLED_EXCEPTION`.

##### Throw

[](#throw)

With `throw` a new exception can be thrown. This example throws an EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_NULL. After the throw it will jump to the next catch that catches an exception of this type. If it does not get caught anywhere it will result in a [KernelPanic](#id-Kernel-Panic) with the error `KERNEL_ERROR_UNHANDLED_EXCEPTION`.

throw(EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_NULL);

##### Try Catch

[](#try-catch)

In order to catch exceptions use `try` and `catch`. If an exception gets thrown inside the try block it will jump into the catch block. After the catch block `clearException` must be called. If you forget this there will be a syntax error.

Example:

try
{
    // Try code
}
catch
{
    // Error handling code
}
clearException();

It is important that `return` can **not** be called inside a try block or catch block. There is some stack memory to free after the try catch block. Usually this is done inside clearException(). When returning inside a try block or catch block this function will never be called. In order to still return use `retex`.

Example:

try
{
    retex(someFunction()); // Save return
}
catch
{
    retex(-1); // Save return
}
clearException();

In order to catch exceptions of an specific type use `catchType`.

Example:

try
{
    // Try code
}
catchType(EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT)
{
    // Handle exceptions of type ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT 
}
clearException();

##### Derivation

[](#derivation)

Derivation means that a exception can have child and parent exceptions. When a parent exception gets caught inside a `catchType` also it child exceptions will be. All exceptions are derived from `EXCEPTION`. Derivation is achieved by ranges starting with 50. The **0** at the end says it is a parent exception of all exceptions that have some other numbers instead of the 0. For example 5**0** is the parent exception from all exceptions from 5**1** to 5**9**.

Examples:

0 (EXCEPTION) is the parent from all
1-49 have no children
5**0** is parent from 5**1** to 5**9**.
1**00** is parent from 1**01** to 1**99**.
1**000** is parent from 1**001** to 1**999**.
127**0** is parent from 127**1** to 127**9**.

##### Exception Codes

[](#exception-codes)

EXCEPTION = 0
EXCEPTION\_OUT\_OF\_STACK = 1
EXCEPTION\_OUT\_OF\_MEMORY = 2

EXCEPTION\_NULL\_POINTER = 10
EXCEPTION\_UNHANDLED\_EXCEPTION = 11
EXCEPTION\_NOT\_IMPLEMENTED = 12
EXCEPTION\_NOT\_SUPORTED = 13
EXCEPTION\_INVALID\_FORMAT = 14
EXCEPTION\_ACCES\_VIOLATION = 15
EXCEPTION\_ACCES\_TIMEOUT = 16
EXCEPTION\_INVALID\_OPERATION\_EXCEPTION = 50
EXCEPTION\_ARITHMETIC = 60
EXCEPTION\_ARITHMETIC\_DIVIDE\_BY\_ZERO = 61
EXCEPTION\_BUFFER\_OVERFLOW = 70
EXCEPTION\_INDEX\_OUT\_OF\_RANGE = 71
EXCEPTION\_ASSERTION\_ERROR = 80
EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT = 90
EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_NULL = 91
EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_TO\_BIG = 92
EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_TO\_SMALL = 93
EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_OUT\_OF\_RANGE = 94
EXCEPTION\_ILLEGAL\_ARGUMENT\_FORMAT = 95
EXCEPTION\_IO = 110
EXCEPTION\_IO\_EOF = 111
EXCEPTION\_IO\_ACCESS\_DENIED = 112
EXCEPTION\_IO\_INVALID\_DATA = 113
EXCEPTION\_IO\_FILE\_NOT\_FOUND = 114
EXCEPTION\_IO\_DIRECTORY\_NOT\_FOUND = 115
EXCEPTION\_NOT\_UNIQUE = 120
EXCEPTION\_DUPLICATE\_KEY = 121

### Advanced

[](#advanced)

#### Error handling

[](#error-handling)

##### Kernel Panic

[](#kernel-panic)

In order to catch kernel errors there is the function `OnKernelPanic`. When this function gets called a kernel panic happened. A kernel panic is like a bluescreen in windows. When this function gets called the operating system is in an unstable state and stops its execution in order to prevent damage. Do not call any ArduinoOS functions inside this function. They will not work and their behavior is unpredictable. You can use this function for example to notify the user about the error code (LED, Serial, ...) or to reset the arduino.

Error codes:

```
KERNEL_ERROR_OUT_OF_STACK        = 1
KERNEL_ERROR_OUT_OF_MEMORY       = 2
KERNEL_ERROR_UNHANDLED_EXCEPTION = 3
```

Example:

void HandleKernelPanic(uint8\_t errorCode)
{
    // User defined code for error handling
}

void setup()
{
    OnKernelPanic = HandleKernelPanic;
    KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel(mainThread);
}

void mainThread()
{
    // Provocates an out of memory error
    while (true)
    {
        InitTask(thread);
    }
}

void thread()
{
    while (true);
}

##### Free Memory

[](#free-memory)

In order to get the free memory use the function `freeMemory`.

##### Free Stack

[](#free-stack)

In order to get the free stack use the function `freeStack`. Keep in mind that this function will require a bit of stack itself.

#### Stack

[](#stack)

A Stack is a data type which allows putting (push) data on it and then take (pop) it from up to down. For more information see [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_\(abstract_data_type\)). Various operations like calling functions require space on the stack. ArduinoOS will reserve stack space for every thread. In order to set the stack space use `InitTaskWithStackSize` or `InitTaskWithStackSizeAndArgument` when creating a new thread.

Example:

void mainThread()
{
    InitTaskWithStackSize(thread2, STACK\_SIZE\_LARGE);
}

void thread2()
{

}

The predefined stack size values are:

```
STACK_SIZE_TINY = 64 bytes
STACK_SIZE_SMALL = 96 bytes
STACK_SIZE_MEDIUM = 128 bytes
STACK_SIZE_LARGE = 256 bytes
STACK_SIZE_GIANT = 512 bytes
STACK_SIZE_DEFAULT = 128 bytes
```

You can also pass you own stack size as an uint16\_t. Keep in mind that this is not recommended for dying threads since the use of many different stack sizes can lead to stronger memory fragmentation. If a Thread with the stack size of 63 will be created 63 bytes of memory will be reserved. After that a second thread with 64 Bytes of reserved memory will be created. When the first thread gets destroyed 63 bytes of memory will be free before the second thread. If now a third thread with a stack size of 64 bytes will be created it can not be placed before the second thread since only 63 bytes of memory are free. So it will be placed after the second thread and will cause 63 bytes of memory to be wasted.

The main thread gets a default stack size of STACK\_SIZE\_LARGE. It can passed as a second argument in `KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel`.

Example:

KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel(mainThread, STACK\_SIZE\_MEDIUM);

### Thread Arguments

[](#thread-arguments)

In order to pass an argument to a thread use `InitTaskWithArgument` or `InitTaskWithStackSizeAndArgument`. The passed argument must be of type void\*.

Example:

void mainThread()
{
    String \*argument = new String("Hello World!");
    InitTaskWithArgument(thread2, argument);
}

void thread2(void\* arg)
{
    String \*argument = (String\*)arg;
    delete argument;
}

### Kernel Tick Period

[](#kernel-tick-period)

The kernel tick period defines how many ticks should pass till a thread change gets initiated. 1000 ticks are 1 millisecond. So when the tick period is 1000 every millisecond a other thread gets executed. The default tick period is 2000. Keep in mind that [getElapsedMilliseconds](#id-Operating-System-uptime) will return a wrong value if you defined a tick period that is not divisible through 1000 (1 ms). This function is used by the kernel internal which also leads to inaccurate sleep periods. In order to set the tick period pass it as 3rd argument to `KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel`.

Example:

void setup()
{
    KernelInitializer::InitializeKernel(mainThread, STACK\_SIZE\_LARGE, 2000l);
}

## Hardware abstraction

[](#hardware-abstraction)

In order to make it easy to use different Hardware ArduinoOS offers different abstract classes for easy usage. Supported hardware:

*   LED
*   RGB-LED
*   Keypad
*   Motor
*   Piezo speaker
*   Servo

Example:

#include <RgbLed.h\>

void mainThread()
{
    RgbLed led(10, 11, 12);   // Creates a new led with the pins 10 (red), 11 (green), 12 (blue)
    led.SetRGB(50, 100, 255);
    while (true)
    {
        led.TurnOn();
        sleep(5000);
        led.TurnOff();
        sleep(5000);
    }
}

## About

ArduinoOS - An Operating System for Arduino

### Resources

[Readme](#readme-ov-file)

### License

[View license](#License-1-ov-file)

### Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. Please reload this page.

[Activity](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/activity)

### Stars

[**34** stars](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/stargazers)

### Watchers

[**5** watching](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/watchers)

### Forks

[**2** forks](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/forks)

[Report repository](/contact/report-content?content_url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FDrBubble%2FArduinoOS&report=DrBubble+%28user%29)

## [Releases 4](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/releases)

[

ArduinoOS Latest

Aug 3, 2017



](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/releases/tag/1.2)

[\+ 3 releases](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/releases)

## [Packages 0](/users/DrBubble/packages?repo_name=ArduinoOS)

No packages published  

### Uh oh!

There was an error while loading. Please reload this page.

## Languages

*   [C++ 73.4%](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/search?l=c%2B%2B)
*   [C 26.6%](/DrBubble/ArduinoOS/search?l=c)

## Footer

[](https://github.com)© 2025 GitHub, Inc.

### Footer navigation

*   [Terms](https://docs.github.com/site-policy/github-terms/github-terms-of-service)
*   [Privacy](https://docs.github.com/site-policy/privacy-policies/github-privacy-statement)
*   [Security](https://github.com/security)
*   [Status](https://www.githubstatus.com/)
*   [Docs](https://docs.github.com/)
*   [Contact](https://support.github.com?tags=dotcom-footer)
*   Manage cookies
*   Do not share my personal information

You can’t perform that action at this time.