Chris's Wiki :: blog/web/WebsitesDontCareAboutClients   

[Chris Siebenmann](/~cks/) :: [CSpace](/~cks/space/) » [blog](/~cks/space/blog/) » [web](/~cks/space/blog/web/) » WebsitesDontCareAboutClients

Welcome, guest.

## Websites and web developers mostly don't care about client-side problems

August 22, 2025

In response to [my entry on the fragility of the web in the face of the crawler plague](/~cks/space/blog/web/WebIsKindOfFragile), Jukka said in a comment:

> While I understand the server-side frustrations, I think the corresponding client-side frustrations have largely been lacking from the debates around the Web.
> 
> For instance, CloudFlare now imposes heavy-handed checks that take a few seconds to complete. \[...\]

This is absolutely true but it's not new, and it goes well beyond anti-crawler and anti-robot defenses. As covered by people like Alex Russell, [it's routine for websites to ignore most real world client side concerns](https://infrequently.org/series/reckoning/) ([also](https://infrequently.org/series/performance-inequality/), and [including on desktops](https://infrequently.org/2024/01/performance-inequality-gap-2024/#desktop)). Just recently (as of August 2025), Github put out a major update that many people are finding immensely slow even on developer desktops. If we can't get web developers to care about common or majority experiences for their UI, which in some sense has relatively little on the line, the odds of web site operators caring when their servers are actually experiencing problems (or at least annoyances) is basically nil.

Much like browsers have most of the power in various relationships with, for example, TLS certificate authorities, websites have most of the power in their relationship to clients (ie, us). If people don't like what a website is doing, their only option is generally a [boycott](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boycott). Based on the available evidence so far, any boycotts over things like CAPTCHA challenges have been ineffective so far. Github can afford to give people a UI with terrible performance because the switching costs are sufficiently high that they know most people won't.

(Another view is that the server side mostly doesn't notice or know that they're losing people; the lost people are usually invisible, with websites only having much visibility into the people who stick around. I suspect that relatively few websites do serious measurement of how many people bounce off or stop using them.)

Thus, in my view, it's not so much that client-side frustrations have been 'lacking' from debates around the web, which makes it sound like client side people haven't been speaking up, as that they've been actively ignored because, roughly speaking, no one on the server side cares about client-side frustrations. Maybe they vaguely sympathize, but they care a lot more about other things. And it's the web server side who decides how things operate.

([The fragility exposed by LLM crawler behavior](/~cks/space/blog/web/WebIsKindOfFragile) demonstrates that clients matter in one sense, but it's not a sense that encourages website operators to cooperate or listen. Rather the reverse.)

I'm in no position to throw stones here, since [I'm actively making editorial decisions that I know will probably hurt some real clients](/~cks/space/blog/web/CrawlerBlockingIsEditorial). [Wandering Thoughts](/~cks/space/blog/) has never been hammered by crawler load the way some sites have been; I merely decided that I was irritated enough by the crawlers that I was willing to throw a certain amount of baby out with the bathwater.

([One comment](/~cks/space/blog/web/WebsitesDontCareAboutClients?showcomments#comments).)

Written on [22](/~cks/space/blog/2025/08/22/) [August](/~cks/space/blog/2025/08/) [2025](/~cks/space/blog/2025/).  

«

[Getting the Cinnamon desktop environment to support "AppIndicator"](/~cks/space/blog/linux/CinnamonAndAppIndicator)

These are my [WanderingThoughts](/~cks/space/blog/)  
([About the blog](/~cks/space/AboutBlog))

[Full index of entries](/~cks/space/blog/__Index)  
[Recent comments](/~cks/space/blog/__RecentComments)

This is part of [CSpace](/~cks/space/FrontPage), and is written by [ChrisSiebenmann](/~cks/space/People/ChrisSiebenmann).  
Mastodon: [@cks](https://mastodon.social/@cks)  
Twitter @thatcks

\* \* \*

Categories: [links](/~cks/space/blog/links/), [linux](/~cks/space/blog/linux/), [programming](/~cks/space/blog/programming/), [python](/~cks/space/blog/python/), [snark](/~cks/space/blog/snark/), [solaris](/~cks/space/blog/solaris/), [spam](/~cks/space/blog/spam/), [sysadmin](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/), [tech](/~cks/space/blog/tech/), [unix](/~cks/space/blog/unix/), [web](/~cks/space/blog/web/)  
Also: [(Sub)topics](/~cks/space/blog/__Topics)

This is a [DWiki](/~cks/space/dwiki/DWiki).  
[GettingAround](/~cks/space/help/GettingAround)  
([Help](/~cks/space/help/Help))

Search: 

* * *

Page tools: [View Source](/~cks/space/blog/web/WebsitesDontCareAboutClients?source), [Add Comment](/~cks/space/blog/web/WebsitesDontCareAboutClients?writecomment).

Search: 

Login:  Password:    

Atom Syndication: [Recent Comments](/~cks/space/blog/web/WebsitesDontCareAboutClients?atomcomments).

* * *

Last modified: Fri Aug 22 23:30:13 2025  

This dinky wiki is brought to you by the Insane Hackers Guild, Python sub-branch.