macOS dotfiles should not go in ~/Library/Application Support @ rebecca®                       

[](#main)

*   [rebecca®](/)
*   [about](/about)
*   [résumé](/resume)
*   [contact](/contact)

# [#](#macos-dotfiles-should-not-go-in-library-application-support)macOS dotfiles should not go in `~/Library/Application Support`

One of my pet peeves is when command-line tools look for user configuration files in `~/Library/Application Support` when running on macOS. In addition to offering poor ergonomics for users, I believe this behavior is _incorrect_ according to the documentation which is cited to justify it. Instead, command-line tools should implement the [XDG Base Directory Specification](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/latest/) and look for configuration files in `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME`, which defaults to `~/.config`.

Usually, when a program looks for configuration files in `~/Library/Application Support`, it’s not because of an intentional design decision. Instead, the author delegated that decision to a library, and several popular libraries for determining platform-specific configuration directories use `~/Library/Application Support` as the default configuration directory on macOS, including [Python’s `platformdirs` package](https://pypi.org/project/platformdirs/) ([242 million downloads / month](https://pypistats.org/packages/platformdirs)), [JavaScript’s `env-paths`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/env-paths) (95 million downloads / month), [Rust’s `dirs` crate](https://lib.rs/crates/dirs) (4.8 million downloads / month), and [Go’s `adrg/xdg` package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/adrg/xdg) (used in 913 packages). While `~/Library/Application Support` may be the correct configuration directory for _GUI apps_ which manage their configuration files for the user automatically, the vast majority of applications using these libraries are command-line utilities whose configuration belongs in `~/.config`.

The main reason I dislike programs looking for dotfiles in `~/Library/Application Support` is that it’s _unexpected._ As [Ashlin Eldridge explained on GitHub](https://github.com/nushell/nushell/issues/893#issuecomment-1736736555):

> As a new user, it’s extremely surprising to me to that a modern tool like `nu` would put config files under Application Support on macOS. It’s even more surprising to see that some people are [actively](https://github.com/nushell/nushell/discussions/5279) [against](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=33425312) adopting the XDG standard.
> 
> The origins of XDG no longer matter at this point. No one really cares what the X, D, and G stand for. The fact is that [hundreds](https://wiki.archlinux.jp/index.php/XDG_Base_Directory) of tools support it (including Git, Emacs, Neovim, Tmux) and users have come to expect support for it. It’s the closest thing we have to a standard that allows users to control the placement of their config files (which facilitates users’ ability to source control their files) and it also includes support for files that shouldn’t be source controlled such as cache and data files.

If a user explains that they found a program’s behavior surprising, many engineers will respond by telling the user that their expectations were wrong. However, I find that the reason users form an incorrect mental model of a program’s behavior is usually because the program’s design violated an established convention from some broader context. In accordance with [the Principle of Least Astonishment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment), I prefer to change the program to behave how users expect rather than futilely attempt to change what users expect.

Users expect macOS CLI tools to look for configuration files in `~/.config` is because **that’s what almost every other program does.** Your program should probably not disagree with Bash and Vim and Git about where configuration files are supposed to go!

These conventions help us explore unfamiliar systems by letting us apply knowledge about one part of the system to other parts of the system. Consistency is predictability. When every tool works the same except for a small handful, users get justifiably annoyed at the exceptions for wasting their time.

## [#](#what-do-dotfile-managers-do)What do dotfile managers do?

Many engineers use (or maintain) some sort of dotfile manager to handle tracking these configuration files. If configuration files are really supposed to go in `~/Library/Application Support`, we would expect dotfile managers to put configuration files there by default when running on macOS. After all, the whole point of a dotfile manager is to simplify managing configuration files across multiple machines and platforms. Let’s take a quick survey to see how some popular dotfile managers behave on macOS:

*   [chezmoi](https://www.chezmoi.io/) (14.3k stars) makes no effort to link configuration to `~/Library/Application Support`, despite including [documentation for using chezmoi on macOS specifically](https://www.chezmoi.io/user-guide/machines/macos/).
*   [dotbot](https://github.com/anishathalye/dotbot) (7.3k stars) ignores `~/Library/Application Support`. Despite including macOS-specific configuration files in the examples, the README shows a configuration for VS Code that will be completely ignored on macOS.
*   [yadm](https://github.com/yadm-dev/yadm) (5.5k stars) makes no effort to support `~/Library/Application Support`. The example configurations include macOS-specific portions but also do not reference `~/Library/Application Support`.
*   [rcm](https://github.com/thoughtbot/rcm) (3.2k stars) makes no effort to support `~/Library/Application Support`.
*   [GNU Stow](https://www.gnu.org/software/stow/) makes (unsurprisingly) no effort to support `~/Library/Application Support`.

Most of these tools are _able_ to link configuration files to `~/Library/Application Support` if you ask them to explicitly (although macOS will regularly replace your symlinks with copies of the destination files), but the fact that they don’t bother to do so by default is revealing. Users only want this behavior for specific misbehaving programs.

## [#](#an-appeal-to-logic)An appeal to logic

Perhaps “consistency” isn’t a good enough reason for you to place your program’s configuration files in `~/.config` like everybody else. Maybe you think that programs should follow the platform guidelines, even if they don’t match developer expectations. [@soc on GitHub](https://github.com/dirs-dev/directories-rs/issues/47#issuecomment-478337412) phrases it like this:

> As a general advice for macOS devs: If you are developing on their platform, do what the platform owners tell you. They are the lords, you are the share-croppers.

Elsewhere, [Reilly Wood rebukes](https://github.com/nushell/nushell/issues/12103#issuecomment-1982144513) a user asking if there would “be any downside to just not using `Application Support` ever” by saying that “\[Nushell would\] no longer be following the [macOS Standard Directories guidelines](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/FileManagement/Conceptual/FileSystemProgrammingGuide/FileSystemOverview/FileSystemOverview.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40010672-CH2-SW6).”

We’ll read through those guidelines in a minute, but it’s not entirely clear to me that they’re relevant in the first place. The [XDG Base Directory Specification](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/latest/) mentions Unix a few times but lists no carveouts for macOS or any other operating system. If `~/.config` is accepted as the standard location for configuration files on Unix-like operating systems, then surely it would be the standard location on macOS as well, given that macOS is a Unix by way of BSD.

But suppose we accept that the XDG specification only applies to _some_ Unix operating systems, despite making no mention of this. The [macOS Standard Directories](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/FileManagement/Conceptual/FileSystemProgrammingGuide/FileSystemOverview/FileSystemOverview.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40010672-CH2-SW6) documentation starts by stating that “\[w\]hether provided by the system or created by your app, every file has its place in macOS”, and honestly we could stop reading right there, because **a command-line tool is not the system or an app.**

While this might seem like a pedantic nitpick, in reality it’s _critical_ to correctly interpreting this documentation! I suspect that many of the developers who cite these guidelines do not know very much about macOS and think that “app” is just what macOS calls executables, but that’s not true. A couple screens down, the same page says that `/bin` “\[c\]ontains essential command-line binaries”, so we can be sure the authors aren’t conflating apps and command-line tools. Apps on macOS are installed in `/Applications` and are subject to [a number of additional requirements](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/preparing-your-app-for-distribution), from a bundle ID (a unique reverse-DNS identifier for an app, like `com.apple.Preview` for `Preview.app`) to application icons, launch screens, code signing, notarization, app sandboxing, and runtime hardening. Needless to say, none of the developers shipping command-line utilities are following any of _these_ guidelines.

Moving on, [the documentation for `~/Library/Application Support`](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/FileManagement/Conceptual/FileSystemProgrammingGuide/MacOSXDirectories/MacOSXDirectories.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40010672-CH10-SW1) says that it:

> Contains all app-specific data and support files. These are the files that your app creates and manages on behalf of the user and can include files that contain user data.

Again, command-line tools do not have _any_ app-specific data because they are not apps. Further, dotfiles are usually written by hand and not managed _on behalf of_ the user.

The next paragraph makes it very clear that `~/Library/Application Support` is for apps only:

> By convention, all of these items should be put in a subdirectory whose name matches the bundle identifier of the app. For example, if your app is named `MyApp` and has the bundle identifier `com.example.MyApp`, you would put your app’s user-specific data files and resources in the `~/Library/Application Support/com.example.MyApp/` directory. Your app is responsible for creating this directory as needed.

Command-line tools do not have a bundle identifier, including many command-line tools shipped with macOS by Apple (such as `ls` or `vim`). And even though [Apple feels very comfortable shipping command-line tools that behave in a subtly different manner from their equivalents on other modern Unix-descendent operating systems,](https://git.lix.systems/lix-project/lix/issues/515) the macOS variants of `bash`, `zsh`, `git`, and `vim` all look for their configuration files in the same place: `~/.config`. Unless your tool is installed in `/Applications`, there’s no reason for its configuration to live in `~/Library/Application Support`.

## [#](#when-should-you-use-library-application-support)When _should_ you use `~/Library/Application Support`

With the guidelines and conventions listed above in mind, your application should store its configuration files in `~/Library/Application Support` instead of `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` if both of the following conditions apply:

1.  It is a GUI application installed in `/Applications` or `~/Applications`.
2.  It manages its configuration files automatically on behalf of the user, rather than expecting the user to write their configuration in a text file themself.

## [#](#tl-dr)TL;DR

Users do not expect command-line tools to look for configuration files in `~/Library/Application Support` on macOS. Dotfile managers do not place configuration files in `~/Library/Application Support` on macOS. The most commonly-cited justifications for placing configuration files in `~/Library/Application Support` are not meant to apply to command-line tools at all. Even command-line tools like `bash` and `git` shipped by Apple look for their configuration files in `~/.config`.

Please, please, _please_ just use the [XDG Base Directory Specification](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/latest/).