Colleges see significant drop in international students as fall semester begins    

Text-Only Version [Go To Full Site](https://www.npr.org/nx-s1-5498669)

[NPR](/) > [Education](/1013)

# Colleges see significant drop in international students as fall semester begins

By Elissa Nadworny

Wednesday, August 27, 2025 • 4:46 PM EDT

Classes began this week for students at the University at Buffalo, a public research university in western New York, but there were about 750 fewer international students on campus than expected.

The new students who did make it gathered for a welcome from the school's dean of students. "We know you have had to overcome hurdles to be here – especially this summer, with visas," Tomás Aguirre told the assembled students, representing more than 100 countries. "And I just wanted you to know that we are so glad you were able to make it."

* * *

Related Story: [NPR](/g-s1-73572)

* * *

The sentiment was common among the students, too. "For me, the main thing is that I got here," says Daria Tofan, a freshman from Romania, who didn't get her student visa until about a week before orientation. "It was awful."

Over the last six months the Trump Administration has clamped down on international student visas, [temporarily pausing](/2025/05/28/g-s1-69282/us-stops-visas-foreign-students) and then revamping the student visa interview process and bringing more scrutiny to the vetting system. That led to long delays and meant many accepted students couldn't get appointments at embassies or consulates in time for the start of the fall semester.

"I only had one goal from the beginning, it was to go to college here, so if I didn't reach that goal it would have been very painful," explains Shivaka Sing, a freshman psychology major from New Delhi. When she got accepted to Buffalo she joined a group chat of other students from India. Many of them couldn't get a visa appointment in time to start the fall semester with her. "Most of them are now transferring to the U.K. because of the visa situation," she says. "Some are planning to defer to the spring semester."

### **Fewer International students on campuses across the country this fall**

At the University at Buffalo, the overall decline of about 15% of international students is happening mostly in graduate programs, especially in the STEM fields. But it's not just Buffalo. Universities all over the country are experiencing similar drops. Arizona State University [reported a fall semester decline](https://news.asu.edu/20250813-sun-devil-community-asu-welcomes-14600-international-students-fall) for the [first time since 2020](https://www.kjzz.org/education/2025-08-17/international-student-enrollment-at-asu-drops-following-recent-federal-visa-guidance-changes). Declines have been announced at [universities in Texas](https://www.keranews.org/education/2025-08-19/texas-universities-international-student-enrollment), [Missouri](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=epKKY5l1-jM) and [Illinois](https://www.wglt.org/local-news/2025-08-04/isu-iwu-and-hcc-international-student-enrollment-is-down-following-national-trend). The [state of Massachusetts](https://www.wbur.org/news/2025/08/26/massachusetts-international-students-customs-trump-administration) is expecting about 10,000 fewer new international students this year.

"One would describe the situation with international students to be very much in flux with tremendous levels of uncertainty," says Fanta Aw, who leads the Association of International Educators, or NAFSA.

Last year more than a million international students studied in the U.S., contributing about $43 billion into the U.S. economy. But Aw's organization [predicts a drop of about 150,000](https://www.nafsa.org/about/about-nafsa/us-economy-could-suffer-7-billion-loss-precipitous-drop-international-students) new international students this fall, leading to a decline of about 15% overall. If that happens, local economies could lose as much as $7 billion in spending and more than 60,000 jobs.

* * *

Related Story: [NPR](/nx-s1-5415740)

* * *

"The loss of international students will lead to a significant downturn in innovation," Aw says. "This will affect communities large and small."

The decline is also happening at a time when other countries, like the U.K. and South Korea have stepped up to fill the gap.

### **Mixed messages from federal government on student visas** 

President Trump has said he wants to keep campus safe. The State Department has revoked [about 6,000 student visas](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cz93vznxd07o) so far this year, citing threats of academic espionage, support for terrorist groups in Gaza and criminal behavior.

And in May, the State Department said it would ["aggressively revoke"](https://www.state.gov/releases/office-of-the-spokesperson/2025/05/new-visa-policies-put-america-first-not-china) visas for Chinese students and add additional scrutiny for future visa applications from China.

But in recent days Trump has signaled a shift. This week, Trump told reporters he planned to double the amount of Chinese students studying in the U.S. He defended those comments a day later, saying "I like that their \[China\] students come here. I like that other countries students' come here. And you know what would happen if they didn't? Our college system would go to hell very quickly."

* * *

Related Story: [NPR](/g-s1-69495)

* * *

Still, President Trump and [conservative leaders](https://x.com/RepMTG/status/1960145337093378246) have said they want to make sure that foreign students aren't taking spots that could go to American citizens. But leaders at the University at Buffalo said at least at their institution, that's not something U.S. families need to worry about.

"We recruit all qualified students to the University at Buffalo and are eager for all of them to attend," explains Scott Webber, the provost there. "I would assure you that our international students do not take spots, you know for other students who are qualified to attend and would be successful here." Total enrollment is actually up at the university overall, and there are still 4,000 international students on campus this year.

### **International students bring money and culture to campuses**

* * *

Related Story: [NPR](/nx-s1-5423535)

* * *

"What they bring to the university is this incredibly rich, diverse cultural experience for students who may not have ever been outside of New York state," says Webber. "They really bring a different flavor to campus."

International students also contribute financially to universities, as many pay full tuition. That revenue has the potential to benefit American students, by funding things like financial aid or stabilizing tuition costs.

As one of the lucky ones who made it to campus at the University at Buffalo, Shivika Sing, says finally being done with the visa process, and arriving on campus has meant she can focus on finding her classrooms, making sure she has all her books and supplies, and getting her dorm room set up.

"I bought a pink _Lilo & Stitch_ soft toy to sleep with," she says. It is one of three stuffed animals on her bed. Those toys are key, she says, to warding off the homesickness that comes from being seven thousand miles from home.  

* * *

### Transcript

LEILA FADEL, HOST:

International students are arriving on American college campuses.

DARIA TOFAN: Hi. I'm Daria (ph). I'm a first-year international student, and I'm from Romania.

PRIYOTA NADH: Priyota Nadh (ph), and I'm from Bangladesh.

FRANCOIS HUMPHRIES: My name's Francois Humphries (ph). I'm from South Africa.

SHIVIKA SINGH: My name is Shivika (ph), and I'm from India.

FADEL: Those students made it to school in Buffalo, New York, after a rocky summer, when the Trump administration temporarily paused and then revamped student visa interviews. NPR's Elissa Nadworny reports from Buffalo.

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON #1: Welcome. We're so excited that you're here on campus.

ELISSA NADWORNY, BYLINE: At orientation at the University at Buffalo, a public research university in western New York, newly arrived international students are getting their campus IDs...

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON #2: So just smile. I'm going to take it on three. One, two, three.

NADWORNY: ...And feeling relieved they made it to campus.

TOFAN: At least we're here. For me, the main thing is that I got here.

NADWORNY: Daria Tofan (ph) from Romania didn't get her student visa until a week before orientation.

TOFAN: To get scheduled for classes, you need to provide the immigration documents. So if you don't have the visa stamp, you're basically behind everything.

NADWORNY: Over the last six months, the Trump administration has clamped down on international student visas. That's created lots of delays and anxiety for accepted students.

SINGH: I only had one goal from the beginning. It was to go to college here. So if I didn't reach that goal, it would've been very painful.

NADWORNY: Shivika Singh (ph) is from New Delhi, starting as a freshman at UB to study psychology. When she first got accepted to Buffalo, she joined a group chat of other students from India. Many of them couldn't get a visa appointment in time.

SINGH: Most of them are now transferring to U.K. because of the visa situation, but some are still waiting for the spring semester.

SCOTT WEBER: Clearly, this year we're having more deferrals. They haven't been able to get appointments for the most part.

NADWORNY: Scott Weber is the provost at the University at Buffalo. The university is expecting a decline of about 750 international students this fall, many in graduate programs, especially in the STEM fields.

FANTA AW: The loss of international students will lead to really a significant downturn in innovation.

NADWORNY: Fanta Aw leads the Association of International Educators. She says universities all over the country are expecting similar drops. Last year, more than a million international students studied in the U.S. But Aw's organization estimates a decline of about 15% overall this fall.

AW: This will affect communities large and small.

NADWORNY: Other countries like Canada, the U.K. and South Korea have stepped up to fill the gap. President Trump has said he wants to keep campuses safe, citing threats of academic espionage, support for terrorist groups in Gaza and criminal behavior - all without much evidence. He's also accused international students of taking university spots that could go to American citizens. Provost Scott Weber says there's room for everyone at his university.

WEBER: I would assure you that our international students do not take spots, you know, for other students who are qualified to attend and would be successful here.

NADWORNY: Enrollment is actually up at the university overall, and there are still about 4,000 international students on campus this year.

WEBER: What they bring to the university is this incredibly rich, diverse cultural experience for students who may not have ever been outside of New York state.

NADWORNY: For the lucky ones, like Shivika Singh from New Delhi, now it's time to focus on being a college student.

What's the most exciting thing you bought for your dorm?

SINGH: I bought a pink "Lilo & Stitch" soft toy (laughter).

NADWORNY: A toy?

SINGH: (Laughter) Yeah.

NADWORNY: To sleep with?

SINGH: Yeah. There are, like, three soft toys on my bed.

NADWORNY: She says those stuffed animals are the key to warding off home sickness that comes from being 7,000 miles from home.

Elissa Nadworny, NPR News, Buffalo, New York.

(SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC)

Topics

*   [News](/1001)
*   [Culture](/1008)
*   [Music](/1039)

*   [Contact Us](/614470770)
*   [Terms of Use](/179876898)
*   [Permissions](/179881519)
*   [Privacy Policy](/179878450)

© NPR