The ABC Programming Language: a short introduction 

# The ABC Programming Language: a short introduction

([Also available in Japanese](http://www2.airnet.ne.jp/sardine/complang/ABCintro.html))

New: [The Origins of Python](https://inference-review.com/article/the-origins-of-python) - An article by Lambert Meertens on the origins of ABC, and its influence on Python.

New: [Implementation](implementations.html) for the Raspberry Pi!.

[The ABC Programmer's Handbook](programmers/handbook.html) is available online.

ABC is an interactive programming language and environment for personal computing, originally intended as a good replacement for BASIC. It was designed by first doing a _task analysis_ of the programming task.

ABC is easy to learn (an hour or so for someone who has already programmed), and yet easy to use. Originally intended as a language for beginners, it has evolved into a powerful tool for beginners and experts alike.

Here is an example function _words_ to collect the set of all words in a document:

   HOW TO RETURN words document:
      PUT {} IN collection
      FOR line IN document:
         FOR word IN split line:
            IF word not.in collection:
               INSERT word IN collection
      RETURN collection

Some features of the language:

*   a powerful collection of only 5 data types that can easily be combined
*   strong typing, yet without declarations
*   no limitations (such as max int), apart from sheer exhaustion of memory
*   refinements to support top-down programming
*   nesting by indentation
*   programs typically one fourth or one fifth the size of the equivalent Pascal or C.

Some features of the environment:

*   no need for files: procedures and functions and global variables remain after logging out
*   one consistent face is shown to the user at all times, whether executing commands, editing, or entering input to a program
*   generalized undo mechanism.

Here follows a quick overview of the programming language ABC and its implementations, and a few examples of ABC programs. Full documentation about ABC is in the ABC Programmer's Handbook (details below).

*   [The Language](language.html)
*   [The Environment](environment.html)
*   [Some Simple Examples](types.html)
*   [Program Examples](examples/)
*   [Why ABC is good for teaching purposes](teaching.html)
*   [Newsletters](publications.html#NL)
*   [A list of all publications about ABC.](publications.html)
*   [ABC Quick Reference.](qr.html)
*   [Implementations](implementations.html): for the PC, Unix, the Mac, and the Raspberry Pi.

## MORE INFORMATION

Full details of ABC and the implementations, along with many example programs are in the book ["The ABC Programmer's Handbook"](programmers/handbook.html) by Leo Geurts, Lambert Meertens and Steven Pemberton, originally published by Prentice-Hall (ISBN 0-13-000027-2), and later reissued by Bosko Books (ISBN 0-9547239-4-5).

See also Steven Pemberton, "An Alternative Simple Language and Environment for PCs", IEEE Software, Vol. 4, No. 1, January 1987, pp. 56-64.

There are also copies of an irregular newsletter (see above). Back issues not online are no longer available.

Email: [steven.pemberton@cwi.nl](mailto:steven.pemberton@cwi.nl)

* * *

[Steven Pemberton](http://www.cwi.nl/~steven/), [CWI](http://www.cwi.nl/), [Amsterdam](http://www.cwi.nl/~steven/amsterdam.html)

Last modified: 2024-02-09