XFN - XHTML Friends Network       

*   Home
*   [Intro](intro)
*   [Join](join)
*   [Background](background)
*   [FAQ](faq)
*   [Tools](tools)
*   [And...](and/)
*   [Helping](helping)
*   [Thanks](thanks)
*   [Feedback](feedback)

# Xhtml Friends Network

XFN™ (**X**HTML **F**riends **N**etwork) is a simple way to represent human relationships using hyperlinks. In recent years, [blogs](http://www.technorati.com/help/blogging101.html "Hyperlink to a definition of the term 'blog' and related terms.") and [blogrolls](http://www.microcontentnews.com/resources/glossary/blogrolling.htm "Hyperlink to a definition of the term 'blogrolling'") have become the fastest growing area of the Web. XFN enables web authors to indicate their relationship(s) to the people in their blogrolls simply by adding a '`rel`' attribute to their `<a href>` tags, e.g.:

`<a href="http://jeff.example.org" **rel="friend met"**>...`

To find out how to write and use XFN, or to write a program to generate or spider it, read the following sections:

[Introduction and Examples](intro)

Introduction to XFN, examples, styling suggestions, and future potential.

[Getting Started](join)

Join the XHTML Friends Network in just four easy steps!

[Profile](11)

Version 1.1 of the XFN meta data profile: the list of the values used in XFN with their significance. See the [XMDP home page](../xmdp) for more information on XHTML Meta Data Profiles.

[Background](background)

The thinking that went into the design of XFN, why particular values were chosen, and why other values were left out.

[FAQ](faq)

Frequently asked questions about XFN.

[XFN Tools](tools)

A collection of tools, templates, editors, communities, and other resources that let you edit XFN information. Includes the [XFN Creator](creator), among many others.

[XFN and ...](and)

How to use XFN with numerous social network services and other technologies.

[What's out there?](more)

Pointers to pages and sites which use XFN, tools, ...

[How can I help?](helping)

If you would like to support XFN...

[Press](press)

Articles about or that reference XFN...

[Thanks](thanks)

Thanks to all those who have helped XFN with their feedback, constructive criticisms, suggestions, and inspirational uses.

[Feedback](feedback)

Let us know what you think about XFN.

[XFN](index) \[[GMPG](../)\]

Copyright © 2003–2025 GMPG. [Some rights reserved](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/2.0/).