all vibe coding tools are selling a get rich quick scheme | Varun Raghu                         

[

# Varun Raghu

](/)

[Blog](/blog/) [Sign my guestbook plis](/guestbook/)

# all vibe coding tools are selling a get rich quick scheme

_09 Sep, 2025_

i wrote a piece earlier about [why I won't be vibe coding anymore](https://www.varunraghu.com/why-i-wont-be-vibe-coding-anymore).

i think of it less as vibe coding now, i kinda hate the term because it makes it seem like its not an involved process. it is very involved, and you can't just vibe it.

all of the different tools selling the dream of building your own $1bn startup from just simple prompting are fooling people. yes all of them. trust me i've tried most of these tools.

you can't fool people into thinking they can build a smartphone or a car with little effort - but somehow you can trick people into thinking they can build a world-class software product that makes millions with little to no effort. this is a scam.

at first i was very hopeful i can finally 'build' now with my minimal tech skills. after months of trying out different platforms, countless prompts, and hundreds of dollars spent - i've come to the conclusion that it's simply not possible. these tools merely give you the illusion that you can code.

only thing i use cursor for now is to make cosmetic changes to my landing page. that is because i'm pretty good at frontend and design. It's a skill i already have. i just use AI to speed up the process.

will these ai coding tools get better? will i finally be able to actually vibe code products? maybe. but right now the whole industry is running a scam and pulling a big fat one on all of us.

   27

footer span:last-of-type { display: none !important; }

{{email-signup}}

Powered by [Bear ʕ•ᴥ•ʔ](https://bearblog.dev)