Observable Notebooks Data loaders | Observable      

Notebooks 2.0

[1.4.0-rc.1](https://github.com/observablehq/notebook-kit/releases "View release notes") [GitHub ★](https://github.com/observablehq/notebook-kit "View source on GitHub")

[

Notebooks 2.0

An overview of the new Observable Notebooks, and why we’re doing this

](/notebook-kit/)[

Notebook Kit

An open file format for notebooks, and accompanying tooling for generating static sites

](/notebook-kit/kit)[

Notebooks gallery

More examples than you can shake a stick at, featuring interactive visualizations

](/notebook-kit/gallery)[

Notebooks system guide

An introduction to authoring notebooks with reactive JavaScript, Markdown, and HTML

](/notebook-kit/system-guide)[

Database connectors

Query SQL databases and data warehouses from notebooks

](/notebook-kit/databases)[

Data loaders

Prepare static data by running Node.js and Python cells

](/notebook-kit/data-loaders)[

Desktop

A desktop application for editing notebooks as local files, and with a radical new approach to AI

](/notebook-kit/desktop)[

Desktop user guide

A visual guide to editing notebooks with Observable Desktop

](/notebook-kit/desktop-guide)

# Observable Notebooks  
Data loaders

**Data loaders** are special cells that run “ahead” at build time via an interpreter, rather than “live” when you view a notebook in the browser. Data loaders are useful for preparing static data, ensuring consistency and stability, and improving performance. Think of data loaders as a generalization of [database connectors](./databases) that allow languages besides SQL.

Notebooks currently support Node.js and Python data loaders. We will likely add additional interpreters in the future.

As an example, here is a trivial Python cell that says hello, and reports the current version of Python:

```python
import platform

print(f"Hello from Python {platform.python_version()}!", end="")
```

The Python cell above uses the text **format**, and hence its value is displayed as a string. The **output** is given the name `hello`, allowing it to be referenced in JavaScript:

```js
hello.toUpperCase()
```

A variety of formats are supported, including these text-based formats:

*   `text` - a string
*   `json` - JSON
*   `csv` - comma-separated values
*   `tsv` - tab-separated values
*   `xml` - XML

And these binary formats:

*   `arrow` - Apache Arrow IPC
*   `parquet` - Apache Parquet
*   `blob` - binary data as a `Blob`
*   `buffer` - binary data as an `ArrayBuffer`

You can also generate images in `jpeg`, `gif`, `webp`, `png`, and `svg` format. And you can server-side render HTML content using the `html` format.

As a more realistic example, below is a Node.js data loader cell that fetches download statistics for Observable Plot from npm.

```node
async function getNpmDownloads(
  name, // name of package
  {
    end: max, // exclusive
    start: min // inclusive
  }
) {
  const data = [];
  for (let start = max, end; start > min; ) {
    end = start;
    start = addDate(start, -365); // fetch a year at a time
    if (start < min) start = min;
    const response = await fetch(
      `https://api.npmjs.org/downloads/range/${formatDate(start)}:${formatDate(addDate(end, -1))}${name ? `/${encodeURIComponent(name)}` : ``}`
    );
    if (!response.ok) throw new Error(`fetch failed: ${response.status}`);
    const {downloads} = await response.json();
    for (const {downloads: value, day: date} of downloads.reverse()) {
      data.push({date: new Date(date), value});
    }
  }
  for (let i = data.length - 1; i >= 0; --i) {
    if (data[i].value > 0) {
      return data.slice(data[0].value > 0 ? 0 : 1, i + 1); // ignore npm reporting zero for today
    }
  }
  throw new Error("no data found");
}

function formatDate(date) {
  return date.toISOString().slice(0, 10);
}

function addDate(date, n) {
  date = new Date(+date);
  date.setDate(date.getDate() + n);
  return date;
}

process.stdout.write(
  JSON.stringify(
    await getNpmDownloads("@observablehq/plot", {
      start: new Date("2022-09-01"),
      end: new Date("2025-09-01")
    })
  )
);
```

The cell above is JavaScript that runs in Node.js, unlike normal JavaScript cells that run in the browser.

The output of a data loader cell is automatically saved to a `.observable/cache` directory on your local file system alongside your notebooks. Data snapshots are stable — the data only updates if you re-run the data loader cell. In Observable Desktop, you can re-run a data loader cell by clicking the **Play** button, by hitting **shift-return**, or by clicking on the query age in the cell toolbar. In Notebook Kit, delete the corresponding file from the `.observable/cache` directory; you can also use continuous deployment, such as GitHub Actions, to refresh data automatically.

The Node.js cell above defines the `downloads` variable, which we use below to render an area chart with Observable Plot:

```js
Plot.plot({
  width,
  x: {type: "utc"},
  y: {grid: true, label: "downloads"},
  marks: [
    Plot.axisY({label: "Downloads per day"}),
    Plot.areaY(downloads, {x: "date", y: "value", curve: "step"}),
    Plot.tip(downloads, Plot.pointerX({x: "date", y: "value", tip: true}))
  ]
})
```

Here’s a bit more about data loaders.

## [Node.js data loaders](#node-js-data-loaders)

Node.js data loaders require Node.js 22.12+ to be installed in one of the following locations:

*   `/opt/homebrew/bin/node` (Homebrew)
*   `/opt/local/bin/node` (MacPorts)
*   `/usr/local/bin/node` (official Node.js installer)
*   `/usr/bin/node` (operating system)

To improve security, the Node.js interpreter uses [process-based permissions](https://nodejs.org/api/permissions.html): Node.js cells are only allowed to read files in the same directory as the notebook, with no other permissions. (We may offer a way to relax permissions in the future, but want to encourage safety; let us know if you run into issues.)

Due to the above security restrictions, if you wish to import installed packages, they must be installed within the same directory as the notebook (_e.g._, if your notebook is in `docs`, packages must be installed in `docs/node_modules` with a `docs/package.json`).

## [Python data loaders](#python-data-loaders)

Python data loaders require Python 3.12+ to be installed in one of the following locations:

*   `.venv/bin/python3` (venv)
*   `/opt/homebrew/bin/python3` (Homebrew)
*   `/opt/local/bin/python3` (MacPorts)
*   `/usr/local/bin/python3` (official Python installer)
*   `/usr/bin/python3` (operating system)

If you have a virtual environment (`.venv`) in the same directory as the notebook, it will automatically be used. However, packages are not installed implicitly; you must install packages yourself, typically using `pip`. (And we recommend using `pip freeze` to create a `requirements.txt`.)

[✎ Suggest changes to this page](https://github.com/observablehq/notebook-kit)

[](https://observablehq.com/ "Observable")

Platform

*   [Observable Canvases](https://observablehq.com/platform/canvases)
*   [Observable Notebooks](https://observablehq.com/platform/notebooks)
*   [Pricing](https://observablehq.com/pricing)

Docs

*   [Observable](https://observablehq.com/documentation/)
*   [Observable Framework](https://observablehq.com/framework/)
*   [Observable Plot](https://observablehq.com/plot/)
*   [D3](https://d3js.org)
*   [Release Notes](https://observablehq.com/release-notes)

© 2025 Observable, Inc.