01 - Basics of Equality Saturation — egglog Python documentation 

                    

[Skip to main content](#main-content)

Back to top Ctrl+K

[

egglog Python documentation

](../index.html)

*   [Tutorials](../tutorials.html)
*   [How-to guides](../how-to-guides.html)
*   [Blog](../explanation.html)
*   [Reference](../reference.html)

Search Ctrl+K

*   [GitHub](https://github.com/egraphs-good/egglog-python "GitHub")

Search Ctrl+K

*   [Tutorials](../tutorials.html)
*   [How-to guides](../how-to-guides.html)
*   [Blog](../explanation.html)
*   [Reference](../reference.html)

*   [GitHub](https://github.com/egraphs-good/egglog-python "GitHub")

Section Navigation

*   [Examples Gallery](../auto_examples/index.html)
*   [Getting Started - Matrix Multiplication](getting-started.html)
*   [Optimizing Scikit-Learn with Array API and Numba](sklearn.html)
*   [01 - Basics of Equality Saturation](#)
*   [02 - Datalog](tut_2_datalog.html)
*   [03 - E-class Analysis](tut_3_analysis.html)
*   [04 - Scheduling](tut_4_scheduling.html)
*   [05 - Extraction and Cost](tut_5_extraction.html)

*   [](../index.html)
*   [Tutorials](../tutorials.html)
*   01 - Basics of Equality Saturation

# 01 - Basics of Equality Saturation[#](#basics-of-equality-saturation "Link to this heading")

_[This tutorial is translated from egglog.](https://egraphs-good.github.io/egglog-tutorial/01-basics.html)_

In this tutorial, we will build an optimizer for a subset of linear algebra using egglog. We will start by optimizing simple integer arithmetic expressions. Our initial DSL supports constants, variables, addition, and multiplication.

\# mypy: disable-error-code="empty-body"
from \_\_future\_\_ import annotations
from typing import TypeAlias
from collections.abc import Iterable
from egglog import \*

class Num(Expr):
    def \_\_init\_\_(self, value: i64Like) \-> None: ...

    @classmethod
    def var(cls, name: StringLike) \-> Num: ...

    def \_\_add\_\_(self, other: NumLike) \-> Num: ...
    def \_\_mul\_\_(self, other: NumLike) \-> Num: ...

    \# Support inverse operations for convenience
    \# they will be translated to non-reversed ones
    def \_\_radd\_\_(self, other: NumLike) \-> Num: ...
    def \_\_rmul\_\_(self, other: NumLike) \-> Num: ...

NumLike: TypeAlias \= Num | StringLike | i64Like

The signature here takes `NumLike` not `Num` so that you can write `Num(1) + 2` instead of `Num(1) + Num(2)`. This is helpful for ease of use and also for compatibility when you are trying to create expressions that act like Python objects which perform upcasting.

To support this, you must define conversions between primitive types and your expression types. When a value is passed into a function, it will find the type it should be converted to and transitively apply the conversions you have defined:

converter(i64, Num, Num)
converter(String, Num, Num.var)

Now, let’s define some simple expressions.

egraph \= EGraph()
x \= Num.var("x")
expr1 \= egraph.let("expr1", 2 \* (x \* 3))
expr2 \= egraph.let("expr2", 6 \* x)

You should see an e-graph with two expressions.

egraph

We can `.extract` the values of the expressions as well to see their fully expanded forms.

egraph.extract(String("Hello, world!"))

String("Hello, world!")

egraph.extract(i64(42))

i64(42)

egraph.extract(expr1)

Num(2) \* (Num.var("x") \* Num(3))

egraph.extract(expr2)

Num(6) \* Num.var("x")

We can use the `check` commands to check properties of our e-graph.

x, y \= vars\_("x y", Num)
egraph.check(expr1 \== x \* y)

This checks if `expr1` is equivalent to some expression `x * y`, where `x` and `y` are variables that can be mapped to any `Num` expression in the e-graph.

Checks can fail. For example the following check fails because `expr1` is not equivalent to `x + y` for any `x` and `y` in the e-graph.

egraph.check\_fail(expr1 \== x + y)

Let us define some rewrite rules over our small DSL.

@egraph.register
def \_add\_comm(x: Num, y: Num):
    yield rewrite(x + y).to(y + x)

This could also been written like:

x, y \= vars\_("x y", Num)
egraph.register(rewrite(x + y).to(y + x))

In this tutorial we will use the function form to define rewrites and rules, because then then we only have to write the variable names once as arguments and they are not leaked to the outer scope.

This rule asserts that addition is commutative. More concretely, this rules says, if the e-graph contains expressions of the form `x + y`, then the e-graph should also contain the expression `y + x`, and they should be equivalent.

Similarly, we can define the associativity rule for addition.

@egraph.register
def \_add\_assoc(x: Num, y: Num, z: Num) \-> Iterable\[RewriteOrRule\]:
    yield rewrite(x + (y + z)).to((x + y) + z)

This rule says, if the e-graph contains expressions of the form `x + (y + z)`, then the e-graph should also contain the expression `(x + y) + z`, and they should be equivalent.

There are two subtleties to rules:

1.  Defining a rule is different from running it. The following check would fail at this point because the commutativity rule has not been run (we’ve inserted `x + 3` but not yet derived `3 + x`).
    

egraph.check\_fail((x + 3) \== (3 + x))

2.  Rules are not instantiated for every possible term; they are only instantiated for terms that are in the e-graph. For instance, even if we ran the commutativity rule above, the following check would still fail because the e-graph does not contain either of the terms `Num(-2) + Num(2)` or `Num(2) + Num(-2)`.
    

egraph.check\_fail(Num(\-2) + 2 \== Num(2) + \-2)

Let’s also define commutativity and associativity for multiplication.

@egraph.register
def \_mul(x: Num, y: Num, z: Num) \-> Iterable\[RewriteOrRule\]:
    yield rewrite(x \* y).to(y \* x)
    yield rewrite(x \* (y \* z)).to((x \* y) \* z)

`egglog` also defines a set of built-in functions over primitive types, such as `+` and `*`, and supports operator overloading, so the same operator can be used with different types.

egraph.extract(i64(1) + 2)

i64(3)

egraph.extract(String("1") + "2")

String("12")

egraph.extract(f64(1.0) + 2.0)

f64(3.0)

With primitives, we can define rewrite rules that talk about the semantics of operators. The following rules show constant folding over addition and multiplication.

@egraph.register
def \_const\_fold(a: i64, b: i64) \-> Iterable\[RewriteOrRule\]:
    yield rewrite(Num(a) + Num(b)).to(Num(a + b))
    yield rewrite(Num(a) \* Num(b)).to(Num(a \* b))

While we have defined several rules, the e-graph has not changed since we inserted the two expressions. To run rules we have defined so far, we can use `run`.

egraph.run(10)

RunReport(True, {'(rewrite (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_x \_y) (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_y \_x))': datetime.timedelta(0), '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_x (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_y \_z)) (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_x \_y) \_z))': datetime.timedelta(0), '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_a) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_b)) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ (+ \_a \_b)))': datetime.timedelta(0), '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_x \_y) (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_y \_x))': datetime.timedelta(0), '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_a) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_b)) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ (\* \_a \_b)))': datetime.timedelta(0), '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_x (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_y \_z)) (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_x \_y) \_z))': datetime.timedelta(0)}, {'(rewrite (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_a) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_b)) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ (+ \_a \_b)))': 0, '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_x \_y) (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_y \_x))': 0, '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_x \_y) (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_y \_x))': 16, '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_x (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_y \_z)) (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ \_x \_y) \_z))': 2, '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_mul\_\_ (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_a) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ \_b)) (Num\_\_\_init\_\_ (\* \_a \_b)))': 3, '(rewrite (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_x (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_y \_z)) (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ (Num\_\_\_add\_\_ \_x \_y) \_z))': 0}, {'': datetime.timedelta(0)}, {'': datetime.timedelta(0)}, {'': datetime.timedelta(0)})

This tells `egglog` to run our rules for 10 iterations. More precisely, egglog runs the following pseudo code:

for i in range(10):
    for r in rules:
        ms \= r.find\_matches(egraph)
        for m in ms:
            egraph \= egraph.apply\_rule(r, m)
    egraph \= rebuild(egraph)

In other words, `egglog` computes all the matches for one iteration before making any updates to the e-graph. This is in contrast to an evaluation model where rules are immediately applied and the matches are obtained on demand over a changing e-graph.

We can now look at the e-graph and see that that `2 * (x + 3)` and `6  + (2 * x)` are now in the same E-class.

egraph

We can also check this fact explicitly

egraph.check(expr1 \== expr2)

[

previous

Optimizing Scikit-Learn with Array API and Numba



](sklearn.html "previous page")[

next

02 - Datalog

](tut_2_datalog.html "next page")

[Edit on GitHub](https://github.com/egraphs-good/egglog-python/edit/main/docs/tutorials/tut_1_basics.py)

### This Page

*   [Show Source](../_sources/tutorials/tut_1_basics.py.txt)

Created using [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/) 8.2.3.  

Built with the [PyData Sphinx Theme](https://pydata-sphinx-theme.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) 0.16.1.