Which npm package has the largest version number?   

 

 open sidebar

[adamhl.dev](/)

[](https://github.com/adamhl8)[](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adamlangbert)

[](/rss.xml)

*   [Home](/)
*   [Blog](/blog)
*   [Projects](/projects)
*   [TIL](/til)
*   [Resume](/resume)

### Recent Blog Posts

*   [Which npm package has the largest version number? Sep 14, 2025](/blog/largest-number-in-npm-package)
*   [Leveraging (abusing?) external formatters in Zed Jun 27, 2025](/blog/zed-external-formatters)
*   [Handling environment variables in an Astro project Jun 7, 2025](/blog/astro-environment-variables)

### Recent TIL Posts

*   [Replacing a ZFS pool device with itself Aug 7, 2025](/til/replace-zfs-pool-device-with-itself)
*   [How to clean up merge commits from git commit history Jul 2, 2025](/til/how-to-clean-up-merge-commits)
*   [JavaScript Arrow Function 'this' Binding Oct 14, 2024](/til/js-arrow-functions)

[adamhl.dev](/)

[](https://github.com/adamhl8)[](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adamlangbert)

[](/rss.xml)

[adamhl.dev](/)

[](https://github.com/adamhl8)[](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adamlangbert)

[](/rss.xml)

*   [Home](/)
*   [Blog](/blog)
*   [Projects](/projects)
*   [TIL](/til)
*   [Resume](/resume)

### Recent Blog Posts

*   [Which npm package has the largest version number? Sep 14, 2025](/blog/largest-number-in-npm-package)
*   [Leveraging (abusing?) external formatters in Zed Jun 27, 2025](/blog/zed-external-formatters)
*   [Handling environment variables in an Astro project Jun 7, 2025](/blog/astro-environment-variables)

### Recent TIL Posts

*   [Replacing a ZFS pool device with itself Aug 7, 2025](/til/replace-zfs-pool-device-with-itself)
*   [How to clean up merge commits from git commit history Jul 2, 2025](/til/how-to-clean-up-merge-commits)
*   [JavaScript Arrow Function 'this' Binding Oct 14, 2024](/til/js-arrow-functions)

1.  [Blog](/blog)
2.  / Which npm package has the largest version number?

# Which npm package has the largest version number?

Sep 14, 2025

12 min read

I spent way too much time on this

* * *

I was recently working on a project that uses the [AWS SDK for JavaScript](https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-js-v3). When updating the dependencies in said project, I noticed that the version of that dependency was `v3.888.0`. Eight hundred eighty eight. That’s a big number as far as versions go.

That got me thinking: I wonder what package in the [npm registry](https://www.npmjs.com) has the largest number in its version. It could be a major, minor, or patch version, and it doesn’t have to be the latest version of the package. In other words, out of the three numbers in `<major>.<minor>.<patch>` for each version for each package, what is the largest number I can find?

**TL;DR? [Jump to the results](#results)** to see the answer.

## The npm API

Obviously npm has some kind of API, so it shouldn’t be too hard to get a list of all… [3,639,812 packages](https://www.npmjs.com/#:~:text=Packages-,3%2C639%2C812,-Downloads%20%C2%B7%20Last). Oh. That’s a lot of packages. Well, considering npm had 374 _billion_ package downloads in the past _month_, I’m sure they wouldn’t mind me making a few million HTTP requests.

Doing a quick search for “npm api” leads me to a readme in the [npm/registry repo](https://github.com/npm/registry/blob/main/docs/REGISTRY-API.md) on GitHub. There’s a `/-/all` endpoint listed in the table of contents which seems promising. That section doesn’t actually exist in the readme, but maybe it still works?

Terminal window

```
1$ curl 'https://registry.npmjs.org/-/all'2{"code":"ResourceNotFound","message":"/-/all does not exist"}
```

Whelp, maybe npm packages have an ID and I can just start at 1 and count up? It looks like packages have an `_id` field… never mind, the `_id` field is the package _name_. Okay, let’s try to find something else.

A little more digging brings me to this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/152515) about the npm replication API. So npm replicates package info in CouchDB at `https://replicate.npmjs.com`, and conveniently, they support the [`_all_docs` endpoint](https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/api/database/bulk-api.html#db-all-docs). Let’s give that a try:

Terminal window

```
1$ curl 'https://replicate.npmjs.com/registry/_all_docs'2{3   "total_rows" : 3628088,4   "offset" : 0,5   "rows" : [6      {7         "id" : "-",8         "key" : "-",9         "value" : {10            "rev" : "5-f0890cdc1175072e37c43859f9d28403"11         }12      },13      {14         "id" : "--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------whynunu",15         "key" : "--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------whynunu",16         "value" : {17            "rev" : "1-1d26131b0f8f9702c444e061278d24f2"18         }19      },20      {21         "id" : "-----hsad-----",22         "key" : "-----hsad-----",23         "value" : {24            "rev" : "1-47778a3a6f9d8ce1e0530611c78c4ab4"25         }26      },27      # 997 more packages...
```

Those are some interesting package names. Looks like this data is paginated and by default I get 1,000 packages at a time. When I write the final script, I can set the `limit` query parameter to the max of 10,000 to make pagination a little less painful.

Fortunately, the CouchDB docs have a [guide for pagination](https://docs.couchdb.org/en/latest/ddocs/views/pagination.html#paging), and it looks like it’s as simple as using the `skip` query parameter.

Terminal window

```
1$ curl 'https://replicate.npmjs.com/registry/_all_docs?skip=1000'2"Bad Request"
```

Never mind. According to the GitHub discussion linked above, `skip` is no longer supported. The “Paging (Alternate Method)” section of the same page says that I can use `startkey_docid` instead. If I grab the `id` of the last row, I should be able to use that to return the next set of rows. Fun fact: The 1000th package (alphabetically) on npm is `03-webpack-number-test`.

Terminal window

```
1$ curl 'https://replicate.npmjs.com/registry/_all_docs?startkey_docid="03-webpack-number-test"'2{3    "total_rows" : 3628102,4    "offset" : 999,5    "rows" : [6    # another 1000 packages...
```

Nice. Also, another `3628102 - 3628088 = 14` packages have been published in the ~15 minutes since I ran the last query.

Now, there’s one more piece of the puzzle to figure out. How do I get all the versions for a given package? Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem like I can get package version information along with the base info returned by `_all_docs`. I have to _separately_ fetch each package’s metadata from `https://registry.npmjs.org/<package_id>`. Let’s see what good ol’ trusty `03-webpack-number-test` looks like:

Terminal window

```
1$ curl 'https://registry.npmjs.org/03-webpack-number-test'2{3    # i've omitted some fields here4    "_id" : "03-webpack-number-test",5    "versions" : {6      "1.0.0" : { ... },7      # the rest of the versions...
```

Alright, I have everything I need. Now I just need to write a bash script that— just kidding. A wise programmer once said, “if your shell script is more than 10 lines, it shouldn’t be a shell script” (that was me, I said that). I like TypeScript, so let’s use that.

The biggest bottleneck is going to be waiting on the `GET`s for each package’s metadata. My plan is this:

*   Grab all the package IDs from the replication API and save that data to a file (I don’t want to have to refetch everything if the something goes wrong later in the script)
*   Fetch package data in batches so we’re not just doing 1 HTTP request at a time
*   Save the package data to a file (again, hopefully I only have to fetch everything once)

Once I have all the package data, I can answer the original question of “largest number in version” and look at a few other interesting things.

(A few hours and many iterations later…)

Terminal window

```
1$ bun npm-package-versions.ts2Fetching package IDs...3Fetched 10000 packages IDs starting from offset 04# this goes on for a while...5Finished fetching package IDs6Fetched 50 packages in 884ms (57 packages/s)7Fetched 50 packages in 852ms (59 packages/s)8# this goes on for a really long while...
```

See the [script section](#script) at the end if you want to see what it looks like.

## Results

Some stats:

*   Time to fetch all ~3.6 million package _IDs_: **A few minutes**
*   Time to fetch version data for each one of those packages: **~12 hours** (yikes)
*   Packages fetched per second: **~84 packages/s**
*   Size of `package-ids.json`: **~78MB**
*   Size of `package-data.json`: **~886MB**

**And the winner is…** (not really) [latentflip-test](https://www.npmjs.com/package/latentflip-test?activeTab=versions) at version `1000000000000000000.1000000000000000000.1000000000000000000`. And no, there haven’t actually been one quintillion major versions of this package published. Disappointing, I know.

Well, I feel like that shouldn’t count. I think we can do better and find a “real” package that actually follows semantic versioning. I think a better question to ask is this:

**For packages that _follow semantic versioning_, which package has the _largest number_ from `<major>.<minor>.<patch>` in _any_ of its versions?**

So, what does it mean to “follow semantic versioning”? Should we “disqualify” a package for skipping a version number? In this case, I think we’ll just say that a package has to have more versions published than the largest number we find for that package. For example, a package with a version of `1.888.0` will have had _at least_ 888 versions published if it actually followed semver.

Before we get to the real winner, here are the top 10 packages _by total number of versions published_:

```
1electron-remote-control -> 37328 total versions2@npm-torg/public-scoped-free-org-test-package-2 -> 37134 total versions3public-unscoped-test-package -> 27719 total versions4carrot-scan -> 27708 total versions5@npm-torg/public-test-package-2 -> 27406 total versions6@octopusdeploy/design-system-components -> 26724 total versions7@octopusdeploy/type-utils -> 26708 total versions8@octopusdeploy/design-system-tokens -> 22122 total versions9@mahdiarjangi/phetch-cli -> 19498 total versions10@atlassian-test-prod/hello-world -> 19120 total versions
```

Top 10 packages that (probably) follow semver _by largest number in one of its versions_:

```
1electron-remote-control -> 19065 (1.2.19065)2@atlassian-test-prod/hello-world -> 16707 (9.7.16707)3@octopusdeploy/design-system-components -> 14274 (2025.3.14274)4@octopusdeploy/type-utils -> 14274 (2025.3.14274)5@octopusdeploy/design-system-tokens -> 14274 (2025.3.14274)6@atlassian-test-staging/test -> 13214 (49.4.13214)7binky -> 9906 (3.4.9906)8kse-visilia -> 5997 (1.6.5997)9@idxdb/promised -> 4614 (2.3.4614)10wix-style-react -> 4264 (1.1.4264)
```

So it seems like the winner is [electron-remote-control](https://github.com/DinoscapeProgramming/Remote-Control), right? Unfortunately, I’m not going to count that either. It only has so many versions because of a [misconfigured GitHub action](https://github.com/DinoscapeProgramming/Remote-Control/issues/3) that ran every hour… for a while.

I manually went down the above list, disqualifying any packages that had similar issues. I also checked that “new” versions actually differed from previous versions in terms of content. Overall, I looked for a package that was actually publishing new versions on purpose with _some_ kind of change to the package content.

**The real winner (#20 on the list) is:** [@wppconnect/wa-version](https://github.com/wppconnect-team/wa-version) at version `1.5.2219`.

What you do with this extremely important and useful information is up to you.

## Script

```
1/* This script uses Bun specific APIs and should be executed directly with Bun */2
3import fs from "node:fs/promises"4import process from "node:process"5
6async function main() {7  const NUM_TO_PRINT = 208
9  const packageIds = await fetchPackageIds()10  const packageData = await fetchAllPackageData(packageIds)11  const normalizedPackageData = normalizePackageData(packageData)12
13  const packagsByNumOfVersions = packageData.toSorted((a, b) => b.versions.length - a.versions.length) // don't use normalizedPackageData here because it *only* includes valid semver versions14  const packagesByLargestNumber = normalizedPackageData.toSorted((a, b) => b.largestNumber.num - a.largestNumber.num)15
16  // Ignore packages where the number of versions isn't greater than the largest number.17  // For example, a package with a version of 1.888.0 will have had *at least* 888 versions published if it actually followed semver.18  const packagesWithSemverByLargestNumber = packagesByLargestNumber.filter(19    (pkg) => pkg.versions.length >= pkg.largestNumber.num,20  )21  const packagesWithoutKnownBadByLargestNumber = packagesWithSemverByLargestNumber.filter((pkg) =>22    KNOWN_BAD_PACKAGES.every((badId) => !pkg.id.startsWith(badId)),23  )24
25  console.log(`\nTop ${NUM_TO_PRINT} packages by total number of versions published:`)26  for (const { id, versions } of packagsByNumOfVersions.slice(0, NUM_TO_PRINT)) {27    console.log(`${id} -> ${versions.length} total versions`)28  }29
30  const logPackagesByLargestNumber = (packages: NormalizedPackageData[]) => {31    for (const { id, largestNumber } of packages.slice(0, NUM_TO_PRINT)) {32      console.log(`${id} -> ${largestNumber.num} (${largestNumber.version})`)33    }34  }35
36  console.log(`\nTop ${NUM_TO_PRINT} packages by largest number in version:`)37  logPackagesByLargestNumber(packagesByLargestNumber)38
39  console.log(`\nTop ${NUM_TO_PRINT} packages that follow semver by largest number in version:`)40  logPackagesByLargestNumber(packagesWithSemverByLargestNumber)41
42  console.log(43    `\nTop ${NUM_TO_PRINT} packages that follow semver by largest number in version (excluding known bad packages):`,44  )45  logPackagesByLargestNumber(packagesWithoutKnownBadByLargestNumber)46
47  console.log("\nDone!")48}49
50/**51 * These are packages that have a large number of versions because of some automation (e.g. GitHub Action), where each "new" version was identical to the last.52 * For example, 'electron-remote-control' was publishing a version every hour for a long time due to a configuration mistake.53 */54const KNOWN_BAD_PACKAGES = [55  "electron-remote-control",56  "carrot-scan",57  "@atlassian-test",58  "@octopusdeploy",59  "binky",60  "kse-visilia",61  "intraactive-sdk-ui",62  "@idxdb/promised",63  "wix-style-react",64  "sale-client",65  "botfather",66  "electron-i18n",67  "warframe-items",68  "ebt-vue",69  "@geometryzen/jsxgraph",70  "eslint-config-innovorder-v2",71  "@innovorder/serverless-resize-bucket-images",72  "@xuda.io/xuda-worker-bundle",73  "@abtasty/pulsar-common-ui",74]75
76/**77 * Fetches every single package ID from the npm replicate API and writes the data to a file.78 */79async function fetchPackageIds(): Promise<string[]> {80  const packageIdsFile = Bun.file("package-ids.json")81  // return the existing package IDs if they exist82  if (await packageIdsFile.exists()) {83    console.log("Using existing package IDs")84    return (await packageIdsFile.json()) as string[]85  }86
87  console.log("Fetching package IDs...")88  let firstFetch = true89  let startKeyPackageId: string | undefined90  const packageIds: string[] = []91
92  // We use the last package ID of current fetch as the start key for the next fetch. Once the start key is the same as the last package ID, we've fetched all packages and can break out of the loop.93  while (true) {94    const LIMIT = 10_00095    const startKeyQueryParam = firstFetch ? "" : `&startkey_docid="${startKeyPackageId}"`96    const json = await fetchJson<{ rows: { id: string }[]; offset: number }>(97      `https://replicate.npmjs.com/registry/_all_docs?limit=${LIMIT}${startKeyQueryParam}`,98    )99    if (!json) process.exit(1) // Stop the script if we fail to fetch package IDs. The error will have already been logged.100
101    const { rows, offset } = json102    console.log(`Fetched ${rows.length} package IDs starting from offset ${offset}`)103
104    for (const { id: packageId } of rows) {105      if (startKeyPackageId === packageId) continue // Skip the startKeyPackageId. The startKeyPackageId is already in the list because it's the same as the last package ID from the previous fetch106      packageIds.push(packageId)107    }108
109    const lastPackageId = rows.at(-1)?.id110    if (startKeyPackageId === lastPackageId) break // we've reached the end of the package IDs111
112    startKeyPackageId = lastPackageId113
114    firstFetch &&= false115  }116
117  console.log("Finished fetching package IDs")118  console.log(`Writing package IDs to '${packageIdsFile.name}'...`)119  await packageIdsFile.write(JSON.stringify(packageIds))120  console.log(`Finished writing package IDs to '${packageIdsFile.name}'`)121
122  return packageIds123}124
125interface PackageData {126  id: string127  versions: string[]128}129
130/**131 * Fetches all package metadata from the npm registry API and writes the data to a file.132 */133async function fetchAllPackageData(packageIds: string[]): Promise<PackageData[]> {134  /** The number of packages to fetch at once */135  const BATCH_SIZE = 50136
137  interface FetchedPackageData {138    _id: string139    versions?: Record<string, unknown> // when we fetch package data, sometimes the versions object is missing140  }141
142  const packageDataFile = Bun.file("package-data.json")143  // return the existing package data if it exists144  if (await packageDataFile.exists()) {145    console.log("Using existing package data")146    return (await packageDataFile.json()) as PackageData[]147  }148
149  console.log("Fetching package data...")150  const allPackageData: PackageData[] = []151
152  while (packageIds.length > 0) {153    const startTime = Date.now()154
155    const batch = packageIds.splice(0, BATCH_SIZE)156
157    const packageDataPromises = batch.map(async (packageId) => {158      const fetchedPackageData = await fetchJson<FetchedPackageData>(159        `https://registry.npmjs.org/${encodeURIComponent(packageId)}`,160      )161      if (!fetchedPackageData) return162      const { _id, versions = {} } = fetchedPackageData // default versions to an empty object if it doesn't exist163      const packageData: PackageData = { id: _id, versions: Object.keys(versions).reverse() } // reverse the versions array so the newest version is first164      return packageData165    })166    const packageData = (await Promise.all(packageDataPromises)).filter((data) => data !== undefined)167
168    allPackageData.push(...packageData)169
170    const endTime = Date.now()171    const duration = endTime - startTime172    console.log(173      `Fetched ${packageData.length} packages in ${duration}ms (${Math.round((packageData.length / duration) * 1000)} packages/s)`,174    )175  }176
177  console.log("Finished fetching package data")178  console.log(`Writing package data to '${packageDataFile.name}'...`)179  await packageDataFile.write(JSON.stringify(allPackageData))180  console.log(`Finished writing package data to '${packageDataFile.name}'`)181
182  return allPackageData183}184
185type SemverNumbers = [number, number, number]186interface NormalizedPackageData {187  id: string188  largestNumber: {189    num: number190    version: string191  }192  versions: SemverNumbers[]193}194
195/**196 * Transforms package data so that it includes the largest number from all of its versions.197 * In each `versions` array, only valid semver versions are kept.198 */199function normalizePackageData(packageData: PackageData[]): NormalizedPackageData[] {200  console.log("Getting normalized package data...")201  const normalizedPackageData = packageData202    .map((pkg) => {203      const semverVersions = pkg.versions204        .map((version) => splitSemver(version))205        .filter((version) => version !== undefined)206      if (semverVersions.length === 0) return // if the package didn't have any valid semver versions, don't include it207
208      let largestNumber = { num: 0, version: "" }209      for (const semver of semverVersions) {210        const [major, minor, patch] = semver211        const num = Math.max(major, minor, patch)212        if (num > largestNumber.num) largestNumber = { num, version: semver.join(".") }213      }214
215      const normalizedPackage = { id: pkg.id, largestNumber, versions: semverVersions }216      return normalizedPackage217    })218    .filter((pkg) => pkg !== undefined)219
220  console.log("Finished getting normalized package data")221
222  return normalizedPackageData223}224
225await main()226
227/* UTILS */228
229/**230 *231 * Splits a valid semver string into an array of three number: `[major, minor, patch]`232 * If the string is not a valid semver, `undefined` is returned.233 */234function splitSemver(version: string): SemverNumbers | undefined {235  const versionParts = version.split(".").map((part) => Number.isInteger(Number(part)) && Number.parseInt(part, 10))236  if (versionParts.length !== 3) return237  const [major, minor, patch] = versionParts238  if (!(major && minor && patch)) return239  return [major, minor, patch]240}241
242/**243 * Calls `console.error` with the message and appends the message to a `error.log` file.244 */245function logError(message: string) {246  console.error(message)247  fs.appendFile("error.log", message)248}249
250/**251 * Fetches the url and returns the JSON response object. Calls {@link logError} and returns `undefined` instead of throwing if an error occurs.252 */253async function fetchJson<T>(url: string): Promise<T | undefined> {254  try {255    const response = await fetch(url)256    if (!response.ok) throw new Error(`(${response.status}) ${await response.text()}`)257    return (await response.json()) as T258  } catch (error) {259    const errorMessage = error instanceof Error ? error.message : String(error)260    logError(`something went wrong fetching json for '${url}': ${errorMessage}`)261  }262
263  return264}
```

* * *

[Table of Contents](#title)

1.  [The npm API](#the-npm-api)
2.  [Results](#results)
3.  [Script](#script)