Linking to text fragments with a bookmarklet – alexwlchan[Skip to main content](#main)

# [alexwlchan](/)

*   [articles](/articles/)
*   [today i learned](/til/)
*   [tags](/tags/)
*   [contact](/contact/)

# Linking to text fragments with a bookmarklet

*   Tagged with [bookmarklets](/tags/bookmarklets/), [javascript](/tags/javascript/)
*   Posted 14 September 2025

One of my favourite features added to web browsers in the last few years is [text fragments](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/URI/Reference/Fragment/Text_fragments).

Text fragments allow you to link directly to specific text on a web page, and some browsers will highlight the linked text – for example, by scrolling to it, or adding a coloured highlight. This is useful if I’m linking to a long page that doesn’t have linkable headings – I want it to be easy for readers to find the part of the page I was looking for.

Here’s an example of a URL with a text fragment:

[`https://example.com/**#:~:text=illustrative%20examples**`](https://example.com/#:~:text=illustrative%20examples)

But I don’t find the syntax especially intuitive – I can never remember exactly what mix of colons and tildes to add to a URL.

To help me out, I’ve written a small bookmarklet to generate these URLs:

[Create link to selected text](javascript:\(function\(\)%7Bconst%20selectedText%20%3D%20window.getSelection\(\).toString\(\).trim\(\)%3B%0A%0Aif%20\(!selectedText\)%20%7B%0A%20%20alert\(%22You%20need%20to%20select%20some%20text!%22\)%3B%0A%20%20return%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Aconst%20url%20%3D%20new%20URL\(window.location\)%3B%0Aurl.hash%20%3D%20%60%3A~%3Atext%3D%24%7BencodeURIComponent\(selectedText\)%7D%60%3B%0A%0Aalert\(url.toString\(\)\)%3B%7D\)\(\)%3B)

To install the bookmarklet, drag it to my bookmarks bar.

When I’m looking at a page and want to create a text fragment link, I select the text and click the bookmarklet. It works out the correct URL and shows it in a popup, ready to copy and paste. You can try it now – select some text on this page, then click the button to see the text fragment URL.

It’s a small tool, but it’s made my link sharing much easier.

> **Update, 16 September 2025:** [Smoljaguar](https://spacey.space/@Smoljaguar/115207596961573171) on Mastodon pointed out that Firefox, Chrome, and Safari all have menu items for “Copy Link with Highlight” which does something very similar. The reason I don’t use these is because I didn’t know they exist!
> 
> I use Safari as my main browser, and this item is only available in the right-click menu. One reason I like bookmarklets is that they become items in the Bookmarks menu, and then it’s easy for me to assign keyboard shortcuts.

## Bookmarklet source code

This is the JavaScript that gets triggered when you run the bookmarklet:

```
const selectedText = window.getSelection().toString().trim();

if (!selectedText) {
  alert("You need to select some text!");
  return;
}

const url = new URL(window.location);
url.hash = `:~:text=${encodeURIComponent(selectedText)}`;

alert(url.toString());
```

**This site is made with ❤︎ by Alex Chan (they/she).**

It’s licensed under [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) – you can use, share, and adapt what you’ve read, as long as you link back to me. If you like the site, please consider [making a donation](https://ko-fi.com/alexwlchan).

*   [Subscribe](/subscribe/)
*   [Contact](/contact/)
*   [Edit this page](https://github.com/alexwlchan/alexwlchan.net/blob/main/src/_posts/2025/2025-09-14-text-fragments-bookmarklet.md)
*   [About the site](/about-the-site/)
*   [Privacy policy](/privacy/)