XD1 Log entries. Begin... · Not buying American anymore          

# [XD1 Log entries. Begin...](/)

# [](#content-not-buying-american-anymore "Permalink")Not buying American anymore

I feel like I need to first defuse any idea of antagonizing Americans themselves. The people are never to blame. This isn't a post criticizing the American people, it's criticizing the state of things that makes it impractical to have any sort of economical relation with the country if you are an average Joe like me.

## [](#content-where-do-i-come-from "Permalink")Where do I come from

I come from a place where I believe regulation needs to be employed to protect the weaker party in any economic relation. If you don't agree with this probably this rant isn't for you.

I also come from Brazil, a country that, for better or worse, is arguably a strongly regulated market. For worse I guess because it makes all transactions that bit more bureaucratic, for better because I am sure to be able to buy something and have it too, without fear that corporations will swoop in and take away my rights after purchase.

The [Consumer Defense Code](https://www.gov.br/mj/pt-br/assuntos/seus-direitos/consumidor/Anexos/guia-do-consumidor-estrangeiro-ingles.pdf) is strong and mostly works, at least insofar as I needed to use it, and many issues can be resolved directly with companies via [reclameaqui](https://www.reclameaqui.com.br/), which is a website that streamlines the communication with sellers to resolve problems without having to go to court.

So here are my biases laid out in advance.

## [](#content-why-am-i-writing-this "Permalink")Why am I writing this

I've been following [Louis Rossmann's youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@rossmanngroup) for a while now, mostly because their tech repair videos are really interesting. And I really love cats. But lately I've seen [many](https://youtu.be/HlyiLQ6WPRU?si=LeS8D1ntWfTUrUUB) [worrying](https://youtu.be/KNuZ3BjT7IU?si=93NVeqWEI1CO24Nv) [videos](https://youtu.be/lzdIjCzKhfM?si=dET-MmiWzW7VJixk) in the channel about anti-consumer practices and I felt like I needed to vent.

You can ask why do I even care about these videos if I don't live in the US. Well, in a globalized world where we are steadily blurrying the lines that separate countries and nations (also for better and worse), there is really no such distinction. Sure when I buy services and pay for them in my local currency, I'm likely protected by local laws, and also in the case of Netflix I'm also restricted by geographical limitations, but that's not always the case, specially when purchasing software.

I've just came across [this video](https://youtu.be/YAx3yCNomkg?si=PhsAcUN-z7zXpvOC) where Louis explains what Reason studios did to screw over their customers by removing the option to activate older products that still work fine. I am also a musician in my spare time, mostly hobbyist, but I did purchase music production software before and I could just as easily have been a victim of such customer-hostile practices. I don't need to be American to be an interested party when laws, or lack thereof, of foreign country directly affects me.

## [](#content-current-state-of-things "Permalink")Current state of things

All this points to a very clear trend, at least for me, that the US is [openly an oligarchy](https://www.hks.harvard.edu/faculty-research/policycast/oligarchy-open-what-happens-now-us-forced-confront-its-plutocracy). And this explains very well this trend of consumer-hostile practices.

If a country and its laws serve the nobility and the extremely wealthy, it'll work in favor of those, of maintaining their status and wealth. An oligarchy isn't a regime that is characterized by actively screwing over the common people. It doesn't need to be. All it needs is to give a free pass for those that maintain power and influence to do whatever they want in order to maximize their profits and expand their influence.

This is why all these anti-consumer practices are happening out in the open. Really... what are the chances that in the current administration a profitable company will be prosecuted by anti-consumer practices?

Given time, a liberal capitalist democracy with excessively weak regulations will eventually devolve into a plutocracy just because companies need to make money to appease investors at all costs. When they are out of ideas for innovation, or when innovation is just too risky, they will [make their services worse](https://www.baldurbjarnason.com/2024/the-deterioration-of-google/), [violate consumer protection laws if it makes them more competitive](https://shawlewenz.com/11-times-big-brands-violated-consumer-protection-laws/) and [make the consumer pay more for it](https://disconnect.blog/ive-had-it-with-microsoft/), just because it looks good in a quarterly report -- which I guess [won't be quarterly anymore](https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/boards-policy-regulation/trump-renews-calls-ending-quarterly-reports-companies-2025-09-16/) because it's not looking too good lately.

## [](#content-a-counter-argument "Permalink")A counter argument

There is a point to be made that all these changes were made recently and that there was no reason not to buy American ten, fifteen years ago. And therefore this logic of not buying American isn't going to work because the same can happen anywhere else.

But I'd disagree. We can't and we don't need to be able to see the future to make informed decisions. Ten years ago there was no reason not to buy American. There is now and that's the end of it. If I start buying European and they start behaving like the US does now, then this rant will just as easily apply to them.

A good, informed decision doesn't require knowledge of the future. It just need to be grounded in solid contemporary facts, and the fact is there is no reason we can trust American companies anymore.

This rant also isn't to say that _all_ American companies are trying to make the largest possible profit at the expense of their customers. There surely are legit businesses trying to be profitable at the same time as they care and protect their customers. Unfortunately these same theoretical companies are subjective to the current US economical ethos that exposes them to hostile takeovers and pressure from investors. This is why in an unregulated market that makes it _that_ easy to screw customers over, even those that are honest good-working citizens can't really be trusted to run stable and responsible companies in the long run.

## [](#content-a-moral-imperative "Permalink")A moral imperative

The TLDR is: if you can, don't buy American. I'm not buying it anymore if I can. There is little innovation to be had there, little protection to rely upon and to be honest little incentive to keep buying it, because the rest of the world is picking up relatively quickly, since all the wealth has had a negative impact in the incentive for the US industry to keep itself up to date.

Choosing not to buy American is a message. The message is simple. I don't need it. I would like to keep improving on things, keep working together and be part of flourishing global community. But I don't have to. I can make do with less feature-packed alternatives that will serve me longer term. I can do without all the wealth and shiny things, because honestly in a couple of decades time nobody will even remember it if the US keeps not paying attention to those that generate actual value to the world, the people. If you change your laws, if you can show that you are not out there to get my money at all costs, then we are back in business. Until them I'm not buying American anymore.

Nothing is too big that it can't be replaced.

## [](#content-comments "Permalink")Comments

If you want to comment on this blog post, I invite you to follow the dicussions on [Hackernews](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=45277346).

September 17, 2025 11:30 AM

[rant](/tag/rant) [opinion](/tag/opinion) [tech](/tag/tech)

* * *

## Recent posts

*   [Not buying American anymore](/2025/09/not-buying-american-anymore)
*   [Installing ReShade for the Steam version of Chrono Trigger on Linux](/2024/08/installing-reshade-for-the-steam-version-of-chrono-trigger-on-linux)
*   [Against political realism](/2024/07/against-political-realism)
*   [Backups and bitrot](/2024/03/backups-and-bitrot)
*   [Hyprland crash course](/2024/03/hyprland-crash-course)

Made with [weblog.lol](https://weblog.lol).