The Blots Programming Language

# 

The Blots Programming Language

Blots is a small, expression-oriented programming language designed to be quick to learn and easy to use. Blots code tends to be very readable yet reasonably compact.

Blots is not a general-purpose programming language. Instead, it's designed to be useful out of the box for quick calculations and data transformation, particularly with JSON.

## Installation

The most recent version of Blots is 0.7.4, released on 9/18/2025.

If you're on macOS, the recommended way to install the latest version of Blots is with [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/):

brew install paul-russo/tap/blots

You can also install Blots 0.7.4 for both Linux and macOS by running the following command:

curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -LsSf https://github.com/paul-russo/blots-lang/releases/download/v0.7.4/blots-installer.sh | sh

## Example

Here's a quick example of how you could use Blots to interactively compute some basic statistics about the weather forecast for the next 7 days in Denver, CO:

First, we'll grab the forecast for Denver from the National Weather Service API and pass the response to Blots as an input. We'll also use the `--output` flag to provide a filename to write the outputs to (this is optional; if we didn't provide a filename, the outputs would just be written to stdout):

blots --input "$(curl -s https://api.weather.gov/gridpoints/BOU/63,62/forecast)" --output weather.json

Since we provided neither a source file nor some inline code, Blots will open up in interactive mode. We can now use the `inputs` record to access the forecast data and bind it to a name (`forecasts`):

\> forecasts = inputs.properties.periods
= \[{detailedForecast: "A chance of showers and thunderstorms... (truncated)

Next, we'll grab the temperatures from the forecasts by mapping over the list. We can use Blots's `via` operator to apply a function to each element of the list. Our function will take just the forecasted tempeature for that period and return it, so the whole expression evaluates to a new list containing only the temperatures:

\> temps = forecasts via forecast => forecast.temperature
= \[52, 71, 49, 73, 49, 80, 53, 85, 56, 83, 56, 83, 54, 86\]

Now we can compute the average temperature using Blots's `avg` function. We want to include this in our output file `weather.json`, so we'll use the `output` keyword to bind the result to a name and record it in the outputs:

\> output average = avg(temps)
= 66.42857142857143
\[output 'average' recorded\]

Let's do the same for the minimum and maximum temperatures:

\> output minimum = min(temps)
= 49
\[output 'minimum' recorded\]
> output maximum = max(temps)
= 86
\[output 'maximum' recorded\]

We can now exit Blots (by typing `exit` or hitting `Ctrl + c`). Let's take a look at the output file:

cat weather.json
{"average":66.42857142857143,"minimum":49.0,"maximum":86.0}

## Documentation

Please consult the [README](https://github.com/paul-russo/blots-lang?tab=readme-ov-file#the-blots-language) in the GitHub repository for more information on Blots's syntax, built-in functions, and other features.

## Tools

There's a language support extension for Blots, available on both the [VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Blots.blots-syntax) (for VSCode) and the [Open VSX Registry](https://open-vsx.org/extension/blots/blots-syntax) (for other VSCode-based editors, like Cursor).

Made by [Paul Russo](https://paulrusso.org)