PARENTAL LEAVE Ways to share it   go.nature.com/parent IMPOSTER SYNDROME How one researcher  overcame it go.nature.com/imposter NEGATIVE RESULTS Publishing them improves  science go.nature.com/negative F or the past two decades, Cormac McCa- rthy — whose ten novels include The  Road, No Country for Old Men and Blood  Meridian — has provided extensive editing to  numerous faculty members and postdocs at  the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) in New Mexico.  He has helped to edit works by scientists such  as Harvard University’s first tenured female  theoretical physicist, Lisa Randall, and physi- cist Geoffrey West, who authored the popular- science book Scale. Van Savage, a theoretical  biologist and ecologist, first met McCarthy in  2000, and they overlapped at the SFI for about  four years while Savage was a graduate stu- dent and then a postdoc. Savage has received  invaluable editing advice from McCarthy on  several science papers published over the past  20 years. While on sabbatical at the SFI during  the winter of 2018, Savage had lively weekly  lunches with McCarthy. They worked to con- dense McCarthy’s advice to its most essential  points so that it could be shared with everyone.  These pieces of advice were combined with  thoughts from evolutionary biologist Pamela  Yeh and are presented here. McCarthy’s most  important tip is to keep it simple while telling  a coherent, compelling story. The following are  more of McCarthy’s words of wisdom, as told  by Savage and Yeh.
Use minimalism to achieve clarity. While  you are writing, ask yourself: is it possible to  preserve my original message without that  punctuation mark, that word, that sentence,  that paragraph or that section? Remove extra  words or commas whenever you can.  Decide on your paper’s theme and two or  three points you want every reader to remem- ber. This theme and these points form the  single thread that runs through your piece. The  words, sentences, paragraphs and sections are  the needlework that holds it together. If some- thing isn’t needed to help the reader to under- stand the main theme, omit it.
Limit each paragraph to a single message. A  single sentence can be a paragraph. Each para- graph should explore that message by first ask- ing a question and then progressing to an idea,  and sometimes to an answer. It’s also perfectly  fine to raise questions in a paragraph and leave  them unanswered.  Keep sentences short, simply constructed  and direct. Concise, clear sentences work well  for scientific explanations. Minimize clauses,  compound sentences and transition words —  such as ‘however’ or ‘thus’ — so that the reader  can focus on the main message.  Don’t slow the reader down. Avoid  COLUMN Tips from a Pulitzer prizewinner Van Savage and Pamela Yeh share advice from US novelist Cormac McCarthy.
Actor Josh Brolin as Llewelyn Moss in the 2007 film adaptation of No Country for Old Men, based on the novel by Cormac McCarthy.
ALLSTAR PICTURE LIBRARY/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO 17 OCTOBER 2019 | VOL 574 | NATURE | 441 CAREERS ©   2019   Springer   Nature   Limited.
  All   rights   reserved.
 footnotes because they break the flow of  thoughts and send your eyes darting back and  forth while your hands are turning pages or  clicking on links. Try to avoid jargon, buz- zwords or overly technical language. And don’t  use the same word repeatedly — it’s boring.
Don’t over-elaborate. Only use an adjective  if it’s relevant. Your paper is not a dialogue  with the readers’ potential questions, so don’t  go overboard anticipating them. Don’t say the  same thing in three different ways in any single  section. Don’t say both ‘elucidate’ and ‘elabo- rate’. Just choose one, or you risk that your  readers will give up.
And don’t worry too much about readers  who want to find a way to argue about every  tangential point and list all possible qualifica- tions for every statement. Just enjoy writing.
With regard to grammar, spoken language  and common sense are generally better guides  for a first draft than rule books. It’s more  important to be understood than it is to form  a grammatically perfect sentence.
Commas denote a pause in speaking. The  phrase “In contrast” at the start of a sentence  needs a comma to emphasize that the sentence  is distinguished from the previous one, not to  distinguish the first two words of the sentence  from the rest of the sentence. Speak the sen- tence aloud to find pauses.
Dashes should emphasize the clauses you  consider most important — without using  bold or italics — and not only for defining  terms. (Parentheses can present clauses more  quietly and gently than commas.) Don’t lean  on semicolons as a crutch to join loosely linked  ideas. This only encourages bad writing. You  can occasionally use contractions such as isn’t,  don’t, it’s and shouldn’t. Don’t be overly formal.  And don’t use exclamation marks to call atten- tion to the significance of a point. You could  say ‘surprisingly’ or ‘intriguingly’ instead, but  don’t overdo it. Use these words only once or  twice per paper.  TONE IS IMPORTANT Inject questions and less-formal language to  break up tone and maintain a friendly feeling.  Colloquial expressions can be good for this,  but they shouldn’t be too narrowly tied to a  region. Similarly, use a personal tone because  it can help to engage a reader. Impersonal,  passive text doesn’t fool anyone into thinking  you’re being objective: “Earth is the centre of  this Solar System” isn’t any more objective or  factual than “We are at the centre of our Solar  System.” Choose concrete language and examples.  If you must talk about arbitrary colours of an  abstract sphere, it’s more gripping to speak of  this sphere as a red balloon or a blue billiard  ball.  Avoid placing equations in the middle of  sentences. Mathematics is not the same as Eng- lish, and we shouldn’t pretend it is. To separate  equations from text, you can use line breaks,  white space, supplementary sections, intui- tive notation and clear explanations of how to  translate from assumptions to equations and  back to results.
When you think you’re done, read your  work aloud to yourself or a friend. Find a good  editor you can trust and who will spend real  time and thought on your work. Try to make  life as easy as possible for your editing friends.  Number pages and double space.  After all this, send your work to the journal  editors. Try not to think about the paper until  the reviewers and editors come back with their  own perspectives. When this happens, it’s often  useful to heed Rudyard Kipling’s advice: “Trust  yourself when all men doubt you, but make  allowance for their doubting too.” Change text  where useful, and where not, politely explain  why you’re keeping your original formulation.  And don’t rant to editors about the Oxford  comma, the correct usage of ‘significantly’  or the choice of ‘that’ versus ‘which’. Journals  set their own rules for style and sections. You  won’t get exceptions.
Finally, try to write the best version of your  paper: the one that you like. You can’t please an  anonymous reader, but you should be able to  please yourself. Your paper — you hope — is  for posterity. Remember how you first read the  papers that inspired you while you enjoy the  process of writing your own.
When you make your writing more lively  and easier to understand, people will want to  invest their time in reading your work. And  whether we are junior scientists or world- famous novelists, that’s what we all want,  isn’t it? ■ Va n  S a v a g e is a theoretical biologist and  ecologist at the University of California, Los  Angeles, and at the Santa Fe Institute, New  Mexico, USA. Pamela Yeh is an evolutionary  biologist at the University of California, Los  Angeles, and at the Santa Fe Institute, New  Mexico, USA.
COLUMN Use poetry to share your science Sam Illingworth explains how poetry can communicate and celebrate research.
I n reading Vachel Lindsay’s poem 'The Hor- rid Voice of Science' (Box), it is easy to see  why many people perceive poetry and sci- ence to be at odds with one another: the for- mer searches for beauty in the enigmatic and  the magical, and the latter seeks to explain this  mystery. As a scientist who uses poetry in my  research, I feel that these two disciplines are  complementary, and we should embrace poetry  as a tool for communicating our research and  developing new understandings of our fields.  One of poetry’s most enduring qualities is  its ability to consider a topic from a new point  of view; see, for example, ‘A Brief Reflection  on Accuracy’ by the Czech immunologist and  poet Miroslav Holub. This makes poetry an  effective medium for disseminating scientific  concepts to non-specialists. Initiatives such  as the Sciku Project (which presents scientific  discoveries and ideas in a haiku format), the  Universe in Verse (an annual poetic celebra- tion of science) and my own blog the Poetry  of Science (in which I write a weekly poem  based on published research) introduce new  scientific ideas in a digestible form that is free  of the jargon and technical language that can  turn non-specialists away from even the most  lucid abstracts. These projects do not aim to  fully explain detailed scientific results through  laboured rhyme. Instead, they introduce the  reader to new research, encourage them to  find out more about a topic and help to make  science more accessible to a wider audience.  These science-communication initiatives all  demonstrate how poetry can be used to com- municate science to non-scientists. But they are  limited in the direction of their flow of knowl- edge. Here, scientists are writing poetry for non- scientists — and are not necessarily concerned  with how such an audience could influence their  research. Poetry is arguably even more effective  in developing dialogues between scientists and  the broader public; for example, the Experimen- tal Words project, funded by Arts Council Eng- land, has brought together poets and scientists  to create works of art that explore the spaces  between the two disciplines.
These dialogues can present researchers  with insights into the direction and govern- ance of future research. This sort of approach  has been used to discuss topical issues, such  442 | NATURE | VOL 574 | 17 OCTOBER 2019 CAREERS ©   2019   Springer   Nature   Limited.
  All   rights   reserved.©   2019   Springer   Nature   Limited.
  All   rights   reserved.