Chris's Wiki :: blog/linux/SystemdCanBeRestrictionCause   

[Chris Siebenmann](/~cks/) :: [CSpace](/~cks/space/) » [blog](/~cks/space/blog/) » [linux](/~cks/space/blog/linux/) » SystemdCanBeRestrictionCause

Welcome, guest.

## These days, systemd can be a cause of restrictions on daemons

September 19, 2025

One of the traditional rites of passage for Linux system administrators is having a daemon not work in the normal system configuration (eg, when you boot the system) but work when you manually run it as root. The classical cause of this on Unix was that $PATH wasn't fully set in the environment the daemon was running in but was in your root shell. On Linux, another traditional cause of this sort of thing has been [SELinux](/~cks/space/blog/linux/SELinuxGotcha) and a more modern source (on Ubuntu) has sometimes been AppArmor. All of these create hard to see differences between your root shell (where the daemon works when run by hand) and the normal system environment (where the daemon doesn't work). These days, we can add another cause, an increasingly common one, and that is [systemd service unit restrictions](/~cks/space/blog/linux/SystemdShouldLearnRestrictions), many of which are covered in [systemd.exec](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.exec.html).

(One pernicious aspect of systemd as a cause of these restrictions is that they can appear in new releases of the same distribution. If a daemon has been running happily in an older release and now has surprise issues in a new Ubuntu LTS, I don't always remember to look at its .service file.)

Some of systemd's protective directives simply cause failures to do things, like access user home directories if [ProtectHome=](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.exec.html#ProtectHome=) is set to something appropriate. Hopefully your daemon complains loudly here, reporting mysterious 'permission denied' or 'file not found' errors. Some systemd settings can have additional, confusing effects, like [PrivateTmp=](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.exec.html#PrivateTmp=). A standard thing I do when troubleshooting a chain of programs executing programs executing programs is to shim in diagnostics that dump information to /tmp, but with PrivateTmp= on, my debugging dump files are mysteriously not there in the system-wide /tmp.

(On the other hand, a daemon may not complain about missing files if it's expected that the files aren't always there. A mailer usually can't really tell the difference between 'no one has .forward files' and 'I'm mysteriously not able to see people's home directories to find .forward files in them'.)

Sometimes you don't get explicit errors, just mysterious failures to do some things. For example, [you might set IP address access restrictions with the intention of blocking inbound connections but wind up also blocking DNS queries](/~cks/space/blog/linux/SystemdPortFirewallWish) (and this will also depend on whether or not you use systemd-resolved). The good news is that you're mostly not going to find standard systemd .service files for normal daemons shipped by your Linux distribution with IP address restrictions. The bad news is that at some point .service files may start showing up that impose IP address restrictions with the assumption that DNS resolution is being done via systemd-resolved as opposed to direct DNS queries.

(I expect some Linux distributions to resist this, for example Debian, but others may declare that using systemd-resolved is now mandatory in order to simplify things and let them harden service configurations.)

Right now, you can usually test if this is the problem by creating a version of the daemon's .service file with any systemd restrictions stripped out of it and then seeing if using that version makes life happy. In the future it's possible that some daemons will assume and require some systemd restrictions (for instance, assuming that they have a /tmp all of their own), making things harder to test.

([One comment](/~cks/space/blog/linux/SystemdCanBeRestrictionCause?showcomments#comments).)

Written on [19](/~cks/space/blog/2025/09/19/) [September](/~cks/space/blog/2025/09/) [2025](/~cks/space/blog/2025/).  

«

[Some stuff on how Linux consoles interact with the mouse](/~cks/space/blog/linux/LinuxConsoleAndMouse)

These are my [WanderingThoughts](/~cks/space/blog/)  
([About the blog](/~cks/space/AboutBlog))

[Full index of entries](/~cks/space/blog/__Index)  
[Recent comments](/~cks/space/blog/__RecentComments)

This is part of [CSpace](/~cks/space/FrontPage), and is written by [ChrisSiebenmann](/~cks/space/People/ChrisSiebenmann).  
Mastodon: [@cks](https://mastodon.social/@cks)  
Twitter @thatcks

\* \* \*

Categories: [links](/~cks/space/blog/links/), [linux](/~cks/space/blog/linux/), [programming](/~cks/space/blog/programming/), [python](/~cks/space/blog/python/), [snark](/~cks/space/blog/snark/), [solaris](/~cks/space/blog/solaris/), [spam](/~cks/space/blog/spam/), [sysadmin](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/), [tech](/~cks/space/blog/tech/), [unix](/~cks/space/blog/unix/), [web](/~cks/space/blog/web/)  
Also: [(Sub)topics](/~cks/space/blog/__Topics)

This is a [DWiki](/~cks/space/dwiki/DWiki).  
[GettingAround](/~cks/space/help/GettingAround)  
([Help](/~cks/space/help/Help))

Search: 

* * *

Page tools: [View Source](/~cks/space/blog/linux/SystemdCanBeRestrictionCause?source), [Add Comment](/~cks/space/blog/linux/SystemdCanBeRestrictionCause?writecomment).

Search: 

Login:  Password:    

* * *

Last modified: Fri Sep 19 22:59:21 2025  

This dinky wiki is brought to you by the Insane Hackers Guild, Python sub-branch.