The Flix Blog • Effect Systems vs Print Debugging: A Pragmatic Solution             

[The Flix Blog](https://blog.flix.dev/)

*   [blog](https://blog.flix.dev/blog/)
*   [tags](https://blog.flix.dev/tags/)

# Effect Systems vs Print Debugging: A Pragmatic Solution

[](https://blog.flix.dev/blog/effect-systems-vs-print-debugging/)

*   By Magnus Madsen
*   •15th Sep 2025
*   •8 min read
*   •Tags: 
*   [effects](https://blog.flix.dev/tags/effects/), 
*   [language-design](https://blog.flix.dev/tags/language-design/), 
*   [flix](https://blog.flix.dev/tags/flix/)

A discussion of how the Flix type and effect system supports print-debugging.

> **"Every lie we tell incurs a debt to the truth. Sooner or later, that debt is paid."**

— Valery Legasov (_Jared Harris, Chernobyl 2019_)

Lying to a **type system** works the same way: the truth eventually comes out. In memory-safe languages, that usually means as a runtime error (e.g. a `ClassCastException`, a `TypeError: foo is not a function`, and so on). In memory-unsafe languages, the consequences can be more dire: corrupted data, segmentation faults, or arbitrary code execution. Nevertheless, if we are in a memory-safe language, we might not feel too bad about lying to the type system...

But what happens when you lie to the **effect system**? Nothing good.

To understand why, let us examine how the Flix compiler uses the effect system:

**Dead code elimination:** Flix uses the effect system to identify expressions, statements, and let-bindings that have no side effects and whose results are unused. The compiler removes such code, improving performance and reducing binary size.

**Inlining and value propagation:** Flix also uses the effect system to determine which let-bindings can be safely inlined without changing program semantics. This enables constant folding and closure elimination.

**Automatic parallelization:** The Flix compiler, in cooperation with the Flix Standard Library, automatically parallelizes a selected set of higher-order functions when their arguments are pure, and when parallel evaluation preserves program semantics.

**Separating control-pure from control-impure code:** Flix uses effect tracking to distinguish code that may trigger effects and handlers from purely computational code. Control-pure code is compiled without capturing the delimited continuation, while control-impure code includes the machinery required to reify the stack.

These are scary program transformations!

Hence, when a Flix programmer writes a function:

```flix
def add(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 \ { } = x + y
                                  // ^^^ empty effect set
```

We — the Flix language designers — are downright paranoid about ensuring that the effects of the function are not a lie. _But surely one little white lie is okay_, you suggest, as you carelessly add that `unchecked_cast` to your program, while I look on with dark visions of unspeakable cosmic horror.

Interlude...

## Print Debugging

One beautiful autumn afternoon, Jim was sitting in front of his computer. Outside, the leaves were turning brilliant shades of orange, while inside, a freshly brewed cup of coffee sat beside him. He had just finished reading a blog post on HackerNews about a new programming language with a type and effect system: Flix.

Intrigued, he downloaded the compiler and typed:

```flix
def main(): Int32 \ IO = 
    println("Hello World!");
    sum(123, 456)

def sum(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 =
    let result = x + y;
    println("The sum of ${x} and ${y} is ${result}");
    result
```

Running the Flix compiler, Jim was confronted with:

```sh
❌ -- Type Error --

>> Unable to unify the effect formulas: 'IO' and 'Pure'.

6 |> def sum(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 = ...
```

Dismayed, Jim poked around a bit but couldn’t get the program to work. Frustrated, he returned to HackerNews and posted a comment:

> Ever tried adding a simple print statement for debugging purposes while coding in effectful lang? compiler: "NNNOOOO!!!! THIS IS AN ERROR; I WILL NEVER COMPILE THIS NONSENSE YOU MUST SPECIFY THE `CONSOLE` EFFECT WAAARGH"

## Being a Programming Language Designer is Hard

The art of programming language design is to balance contradictory requirements:

*   Programmers expect lightning-fast compilation, but also deep, aggressive compiler optimizations. ("The compiler is too slow!" vs. "Surely the compiler will optimize that away!")
*   Programmers want expressive type systems, but also intuitive and helpful error messages. ("What do you mean a skolem variable escapes its scope???")
*   Programmers want type inference, but also simple type error messages ("What do you mean you can't unify these types?")
*   Programmers want escape hatches for everything, but nothing must ever break. ("What do you mean turning off the fuel for the engines crashes the plane? I thought you said this was a safe airplane?!")

Returning to earth: we may be academics, but **we are trying to build a real programming language. That means listening to our users and that means we have to support print debugging.** The question is _how_?

## Print-Debugging — Attempt #1

Consider if we introduce a special function:

```flix
mod Debug {
    pub def dprintln(x: a): Unit with ToString[a] =
        unchecked_cast(println(x) as _ \ {}) 
}
```

Here we use an `unchecked_cast` to discard the `IO` effect of `println`. That is, we _lie_ to the effect system.

While our special `dprintln` function type and effect checks, it does not work well.

If we attempt to use it as follows:

```flix
def sum(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 =
    let result = x + y;
    Debug.dprintln("The sum of ${x} and ${y} is ${result}");
    result
```

The Flix compiler rejects our program with the error:

```sh
❌ -- Redundancy Error --

>> Useless expression: It has no side-effect(s) and its result is discarded.

11 |         Debug.dprintln("The sum of ${x} and ${y} is ${result}");
             ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
             useless expression.
```

The compiler _correctly_ reports that `dprintln` is a useless expression: it has no observable effects and its result is ignored. This redundancy check is normally helpful for catching bugs, but in this case it prevents our use of `dprintln`.

We can try to work around this check with a small trick:

```flix
def sum(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 =
    let result = x + y;
    let _ = Debug.dprintln("The sum of ${x} and ${y} is ${result}");
    result
```

By introducing a let binding with a wildcard name, the redundancy checker is satisfied and the program now compiles.

However, when we run the program... nothing is printed!

Now, the optimizer detects that the let-bound expression has no side effects and that its variable is unused, so it removes it. Normally this is desirable; we want the optimizer to eliminate dead code, but here it gets in our way.

It seems we are stuck. There are two paths forward:

*   We could try to equip the optimizer with knowledge of print debugging statements. In that case, we would track these "effects-that-are-not-effects" and avoid treating them as pure expressions. The problem with this approach is that it would have to handle the entire language—e.g., lambda expressions, higher-order functions, and polymorphism. In effect (no pun intended), we would essentially be re-implementing an ad hoc effect system inside the optimizer.
    
*   We could decide to _disable_ the optimizer during development. The problem with that is threefold: (a) it would cause a massive slowdown in runtime performance, (b) somewhat surprisingly, it would also make the Flix compiler itself run _slower_, since dead code elimination and other optimizations actually speed up the backend, and (c) it would be fertile ground for compiler bugs, because instead of one battle-tested compiler pipeline, there would be two pipelines to develop and maintain.
    

Neither option is really acceptable to us.

## Print-Debugging — Attempt #2

What we need is a better lie: one with a different set of trade-offs.

We introduce a `Debug` effect and use it for `dprintln`:

```flix
eff Debug { /* empty -- marker effect */ }

mod Debug {
    pub def dprintln(x: a): Unit \ Debug with ToString[a] = ...
}
```

We no longer lie about `dprintln`. Calling it now has the `Debug` effect.

We can use it to debug our `sum` function from earlier:

```flix
def sum(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 =
    let result = x + y;
    Debug.dprintln("The sum of ${x} and ${y} is ${result}");
    result
```

The implementation of `sum` is a let-expression whose body is a statement-expression. Because of the call to `dprintln`, the inferred effect of both is `Debug`.

We are now back to the original problem: The `Debug` effect is incompatible with the declared type and effect signature of `sum` (i.e., `sum` having the empty effect set). However, instead of changing the signature of `dprintln` or `sum`, **we will change the _effect system_ to allow the absence of the `Debug` effect**.

When a programmer writes a type and effect signature like:

```flix
def downloadUrl(x: Int32): Unit \ {FileWrite, Http} = exp
```

We first check if `exp` can be type-checked with the signature:

`Int32 -> Unit \ {FileWrite, Http}`

If it cannot, we retry with the signature:

`Int32 -> Unit \ {FileWrite, Http, Debug}`

If that works, we consider the function well-typed, but crucially, we do _not_ update the signature of `downloadUrl`. Consequently, everywhere `downloadUrl` is used, it is still typed as if it only has the `FileWrite` and `Http` effects.

The advantages of this implementation are:

*   We can use `dprintln` anywhere in a function and it just works.
*   We can add `dprintln` anywhere without having to change the signature of the function nor the signatures of any callers.
*   We can be sure that the optimizer will leave our `dprintln` calls intact.

There are two minor downsides. First, adding a `dprintln` marks an expression as impure, effectively disabling the optimizer for that expression and its parent expressions. Still, this is far less invasive than disabling the optimizer for the entire program. Second, because the `Debug` effect is hidden from the function’s signature, calls to that function inside other functions might be moved or even eliminated. On the bright side, this ensures that a `dprintln` only prints if the function is actually called!

**Development vs. Production Mode.** We don’t want published packages to (a) lie to the type and effect system, or (b) contain print debugging statements. Hence, when the compiler is run in production mode, we disable the lie that allows the implicit `Debug` effect. As a result, using `dprintln` in production mode causes a compilation error.

## Addendum: Look Ma: No Macros!

Rust has a beautiful [`dbg!` macro](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/macro.dbg.html) which works like this:

```rust
let a = 2;
let b = dbg!(a * 2) + 1;
//      ^-- prints: [src/main.rs:2:9] a * 2 = 4
assert_eq!(b, 5);
```

Since the macro has access to the syntax tree, it can print the file name, line, column, and the original expression. Flix does not currently support macros (and we would not introduce them solely for this purpose). However, we can achieve part of this functionality using a **debug string interpolator**.

For example, we can write:

```flix
use Debug.dprintln

def main(): Unit \ IO = 
    let result = sum(123, 456);
    println("The sum is: ${result}")

def sum(x: Int32, y: Int32): Int32 = 
    dprintln(d"x = ${x}, y = ${y}");
    x + y
```

Note the debug string interpolator `d"x = ${x}, y = ${y}"`.

Running the program prints:

```sh
[Main.flix:8] x = 123, y = 456                         
The sum is: 579
```

We get the file name and line number for the small cost of a single `d`.

That's all for now.

Until next time, happy hacking.

Copied! Copy code to clipboard

Powered by [Zola](https://www.getzola.org) & [tabi](https://github.com/welpo/tabi)