Nine Things I Learned in Ninety Years                                      Edward Packard                                             © 2025 
                                           Introduction   Looking back over my life from when I was about ninety, I ruefully  reflected on how often I went off the rails. That I’d survived thus  far, scathed but in happy circumstances, was thanks neither to grit,  determination, nor wise counsel, but mostly luck. Considering my  most memorable lapses, the consequences of which ranged from  unfortunate to catastrophic, I suspect that they all would have been  avoided if it hadn’t taken me most of a lifetime to get a grip on a  few basic principles. I’m laying them out here for readers who  might want to be aware of them.   Nine Things I Learned:   1 
1)to be self-constituted    In her book Self-Constitution: Agency, Identity, and Integrity (2009)  Harvard philosopher Christine Korsgaard draws on Kant’s and  Aristotle’s philosophy to make a case for self-constitution — being  “consistent, unified, and whole”–– having “integrity.”        Korsgaard says that to be good at being a person, you need to be  committed to acting in accord with what Kant called “a universal  law,” for which I would substitute “a virtuous moral framework.”  How is that constructed? A strand of thought in philosophy asserts  that moral precepts can’t be scientifically established –– they are  indicia of the ways of thinking of particular cultures or religions.  Arrayed against this dismal take on our need for guidance are  propositions in the “we hold these truths to be self-evident” category,  basic principles like, what causes or tends to cause misery and  suffering is bad; what causes or tends to cause joy and happiness is  good. Anger, hatred, envy, jealousy, dishonesty, meanness,  vengefulness, cruelty, resentment, and despair are bad; joy,  cheerfulness, kindliness, fairness, compassion, and honesty are good.  That’s my moral framework as far as I’ve developed it.   I think of life as like being on a raft drifting downstream on a river  of time, other people getting on and off; meanwhile, you’re poling,  trying to steer the best course, sometimes hanging up on a shoal,  maybe falling asleep and awakening almost on the opposite bank,  where the wind took you, which is not where you meant to be, getting  back mid-stream somehow and carried along with the current through  sometimes wildly unexpected weather until you reach the sea. Maybe  that’s why I admire Huckleberry Finn’s moral framework: “What you  want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody to be satisfied, and  feel right and kind towards the others.”   Professor Korsgaard says, “Your movements have to come from  your constitutional rule over yourself. Otherwise, you’ll be ruled by a  heap of impulses.” That permeated my consciousness. If you aren’t  self-constituted, if you aren’t unified, if you don’t have integrity, you’ll  be a mess.  But what if you are a self-constituted, self-aggrandizing narcissist  who is “consistent, unified, and whole” in your life project of gaining  ever more money, power, and dominance without regard to how it  affects anyone else? That’s not in accord with my moral framework, or  Huck Finn’s, or with Kant’s and Korsgaard’s universal law. You need  moral strands woven into your self-constituted character to be a good  person.  Once you’ve achieved that — once you are virtuously self- constituted — you will be self-assured and have reason to be so. You  will be emotionally invulnerable to being pushed around. You will not  entertain feckless impulses, much less yield to them. It will be in your  nature to do the right thing.    2 
      2) to keep awake and aware   If you’re not awake and aware, you’re sleepwalking. I spent much of my  life in this state, and I know all about it. When you’re sleepwalking, you  fail to consider what the purpose is of what you’re doing and how what  you do or don’t do will affect you and how it will affect others.  Sleepwalkers can go off the rails and stay there unless they luckily  stumble back on track.         Sleepwalking doesn’t necessarily diminish mental acuity, though I  think it invariably affects judgment. Many sleepwalkers hold positions of  power. Coming upon Christopher Clark’s The Sleepwalkers: How Europe  Went to War in 1914 (2014), I knew at once why he had chosen that title.  In each of the primarily responsible countries, men of imperious bent and  puffed-up notions of honor prevailed over wiser and more thoughtful  ones in formulating and implementing national policy. Almost without  exception, those responsible for making fateful decisions proved  incapable of weighing the risk of a staggering continent-wide catastrophe  such as was about to unfold. Referring to Austria-Hungary, whose  leaders were determined to act forcefully after the assassination of  Archduke Ferdinand, Clark says that the decision-makers had no basis  for their preconceived notions of how events would play out.         Charles Swann, a principal character in Proust’s novel In Search of  Lost Time, gives us a close-up look at how a sleepwalking state is  initiated. Swann is intelligent, cultivated, and socially adept, but  whenever he must confront an unpleasant fact if he is to make a rational  decision, “a mental lethargy, which was, with him, congenital,  intermittent, and providential, happened at that moment to extinguish  every particle of light in his brain.”         Sleepwalking is an all too accessible alternative to confronting  inconvenient facts. If you are sleepwalking, and it becomes habitual, a  day will come when you act, or fail to act, in a way such that, were you  in an awakened state, it would be obvious to you that if you continue  your present course of action, or inaction, a catastrophe will ensue.         One can stop sleepwalking and keep awake and aware by becoming a  buddha. This might seem impossible, outlandish, outré, and out of the    question to you, but I have it on the authority of the revered Buddhist  monk Thich Nhat Hanh and my own experience that it’s doable. In  Hanh’s book The Art of Living (2017), he says that being a buddha  doesn’t require any particular belief or practice. Simply “being fully  present, understanding, compassionate, and loving” is enough.         “It’s not so difficult to be a buddha,” says Thich Nhat Hanh. “Just  keep your awakening alive all day long.”   3 
3) to consider what others may be        thinking and feeling   For most of my life, whenever I spoke or acted, I first considered what  seemed to be in my best interest, or, more often, gave no thought to the  matter at all. Only rarely did I consider how anyone affected by what I  said, or did, or failed to say or do, would react.  Fixed in my mind and occasionally emerging in my consciousness  is a conversation I had during college years. It was with a man a  generation older than me, whom I wanted to impress. At a pivotal point,  I thought of a witty remark I could make regarding his boat. I imagined  that I would be displaying a high degree of sophistication in making it.  That was the extent of my thinking before I blurted it out. If I had taken  a few seconds to consider it further, I would have realized that, although  there was a possibility that this gentleman would find my remark to be  clever, it was certain that he would find it to be crude and offensive, so  much so that I’m reluctant to repeat it here, half a century later.   Despite this memorable lesson, it took me a long time to learn to  give thought to what may be going on in the minds of people I’m  interacting with, both empathetically –– sensing how others are feeling,  and cognitively –– conjecturing how they are thinking. The latter is  called “theory of mind,” it being one’s theory as to what’s going on in  another’s mind.  Littered among my memories like pieces of trash along a trail are  occasions when I said something that worked to my disadvantage even  though I had supposed that it would impress, or persuade, or engender  respect for me on the part of the person I addressed it to. Belatedly, I  became aware that decisions involving interactions with others should  be informed by reflecting on what whomever you’re interacting with  may think and feel in response to what you say and do.      4 
4) to make happiness my default state of mind   For some years, I scrolled down Facebook posts every day and once in a  while came across one by the Dalai Lama. One day, I read:   As long as we observe love for others and respect for their       rights and dignity in our daily lives, then whether we are  learned or unlearned, whether we believe in the Buddha  or God, follow some religion or none at all, as long as we  have compassion for others and conduct ourselves with  restraint out of a sense of responsibility, there is no doubt  we will be happy.   That got me out of my normal slouch and sitting up straight. Can  happiness be assured if you just follow a few simple precepts? No need  for mastering meditation techniques, observing elaborate religious  practices, or divining the wisdom to be found in ancient texts?      I’m sure that the Dalai Lama, a practical man who respects science,  would agree that one can’t be happy when being subjected to extreme  emotional or physical pain. But for most of us who are fortunate enough  to rarely or never experience vicious assaults, I came to believe that, if  we feel and behave the way the Dalai Lama recommends, happiness can  become our usual state of being –– our default state of mind.      Later, I came upon another post by the Dalai Lama:         Even more important than the warmth and affection         we receive, is the warmth and affection we give... .        More important than being loved, therefore, is to love.   I’ve come to think that understanding this, too, is required for  happiness to become one’s default state of mind.   5 
        5) to seek an eternal perspective   I said that the third thing I learned in ninety years was to consider what  other people may be thinking and feeling. The 17th century philosopher  Benedict Spinoza expanded his view from that of his own ego to include  the view of other people, and beyond the view of other people to the  view of what he called “God,” or “Nature,” –– meaning the entire  cosmos. He believed that, through knowledge and understanding, one  could find joy and equanimity in the natural order of things. It’s a  perspective akin to that of Buddhism, whose central thought, the 20th  century mythologist Joseph Campbell wrote, is “compassion without  attachment,” a condition in which “you can stay alive, in action, but be  disengaged from desire for, and fear of, the fruits of your action.”        Achieving a similarly expansive embrace of life and the world –– an  eternal perspective –– led Spinoza to conclude that, “A man strong in  character hates no one, is angry with no one, envies no one, is indignant  with no one, scorns no one, and is not at all proud.”         Can you feel fully alive if you are trying to achieve a challenging  goal, but, because you are disengaged from desire or fear (have an  eternal perspective), you don’t have an emotional investment in what’s  going on about you? Isn’t life colorless if you are never thrilled when  you succeed and dismayed when you fail? Achieving extraordinary  equanimity has obvious merit, but if you are emotionally disengaged,  doesn’t it drain the excitement out of life? Aren’t you less likely to be  satisfied?          Not necessarily. In Peter Matthiessen’s book The Snow Leopard,  (1978) he describes his trek with the zoologist George Schaller, in the  Himalayas, in search of a reclusive snow leopard. They found scat, but  never caught a glimpse of the exotic animal they were stalking.  When they returned to base camp, a Buddhist monk asked Matthiessen if  they had seen the snow leopard. When Matthiessen replied that they had  not, the monk said, “No! Isn’t that wonderful?”          It would have been very unBuddhist if the monk had said, “How  unfortunate.” Was saying “Isn’t that wonderful?” a stretch? I don’t think  so, the point being that it was a release from attachment, the expedition  itself was wonderful, their thinking and talking about it was wonderful,  that they were “alive, in action,” was wonderful; and that there was a  majestic animal nearby that was not to be seen was wonderful.         Some philosophers find seeking an eternal perspective to be at odds  with pursuing one’s legitimate self-interest. In his book The View from  Nowhere (1986), Thomas Nagel seems to see it as a balancing act. He says, “The hope is to develop a detached perspective that can coexist with and  comprehend the individual one.” I think Spinoza would say that an eternal  perspective needn’t be qualified to accommodate a self-fulfilling   life; it’s a necessary condition of having one, bringing with it equanimity  and joy.  6 
6) to guard against self-deception               Certitude is not the test of certainty.                                                                                                       Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. (1841-1935)                                                           Self-deception occurs when one’s decisions and conclusions are driven  or influenced by skewed beliefs, unbalanced emotional states, wishful  thinking, and so forth. It doesn’t take much for us to be subconsciously  ingenious at justifying insupportable conclusions. A common example  of the process is confirmation bias –- giving greater credence and  weight to data supporting one’s entrenched beliefs and ignoring or  minimizing what would undermine them. People who are brilliant and  highly educated can be as vulnerable to self-deception as anyone. They  employ their superior intellectual capability to display a virtuosity of  sophistry most of us could never attain.       In his book Things That Bother Me (2018), the British  philosopher Galen Strawson quotes two notable thinkers who lived four  centuries apart, but cast lights of similar wave-lengths on how self- deception becomes entrenched in one’s mind:  Once the human mind has favored certain views, it pulls  everything else into agreement with and support for them.     Should they be outweighed by more powerful countervailing     considerations, it either fails to notice these, or scorns them,                    or makes fine distinctions in order to neutralize or reject  them . . . thereby leaving untouched the authority of its      previous position.                                                    Francis Bacon (1561-1626)  We know that people can maintain an unshakeable faith in      any propositions, however absurd, when they are sustained    by a community of likeminded believers.                                                   Daniel Kahneman (1934-2024)        In his book The Disordered Mind (2018), Nobel laureate  neuroscientist Eric Kandel notes, “All conscious perception depends on  unconscious processes.” Unconscious processes wreaked havoc on my  decision making.        I had planned, as the heading of this section, to claim that I had  learned to avoid self-deception, but after reading more about it, I  decided that I had learned only to guard against self-deception. At that  moment, a cloud of uncertainty threatened to envelop me. Recalling  Yeats’s foreboding poem, “The Second Coming” (1919), I had to tell  myself: Don’t let it be that “The best lack all conviction” is true.                                      7 
7)  how to confront mortality                                     Keep death and exile before your eyes each day. . .
                                                                                     Epictetus  (d. 135 C.E. )                                   The free man thinks of death, least of all things.                                                     Benedict Spinoza (1632-1677)  The ancient Greek and Roman Stoics believed that it’s wise to   contemplate death well ahead of the event. I suppose their idea was that  it’s desirable to contemplate death’s inevitability so as not to be shocked   when it’s staring you in the face. If you have cultivated Stoicism, you   might be better able to bear unexpected news that you have little time to   live. Stoicism is a noble stance, but I prefer Spinoza’s, which is that the   path to equanimity, self-control, and disinterest in one’s mortality is to   be found in gaining an eternal perspective through knowledge and  understanding.         Spinoza rejected all supernatural claims of the world’s religions,  including anthropomorphic conceptions of God and of rewards and  punishments administered by a deity to living persons or in an  afterlife. He lived simply, but disdained asceticism. He considered   doctrinal and myth-based religions to be superstitions; yet he was   pragmatic. Knowing that his landlady found comfort in her religious   beliefs, he took care not to undermine her faith.              I try to delight in the sunshine that will be when I shall never   see it any more. And I think it is possible for this sort of  impersonal life to attain greater intensity — possible for us to  gain much more independence — than is usually believed, of  the small bundle of facts that make our own personality.                                                     George Eliot (1819-1880)  Eliot translated Spinoza’s treatise, Ethics, into English. The passage  quoted above, from one of her letters, is a snapshot of an eternal  perspective in the making.   The best way to overcome the fear of death — so at least it  seems to me — is to make your interests gradually wider and  more impersonal, until bit by bit the walls of the ego recede,  and your life becomes increasingly merged in the universal life.                                                    Bertrand Russell (1872-1970)  In Russel’s essay “A Philosophy for Our Time” he observed that  Spinoza’s philosophy generated an impersonal feeling that overrode  anxiety, and that, even as Spinoza’s death was approaching, “he  remained completely calm at all times, and in the last day of his life,  showed the same friendly interest in others as he did in days of health.”  8 
                                   I look forward to oblivion.  
                                                 Katharine Hepburn (1907-2003)  Katharine Hepburn was one of the most high-spirited and goodhearted  public figures of her time. Her sentiment, quoted above, which she  expressed when she was aged, helpless and futureless, exemplifies the  fearlessness and bravura that marked her character throughout her  illustrious life.  I want death to find me planting my cabbages, neither  worrying  about it, nor about the unfinished gardening.                                                 Michel de Montaigne (1533-1592)  The great essayist was probably as sensible a person as anyone who      ever lived.   9 
8) what an outsized role is played by luck; In his book, Night Thoughts (2009), the actor, playwright, and essayist  Wallace Shawn says that he was born lucky (that is –– to well-heeled,  sophisticated, highly intelligent, generally enlightened parents). But  unlike most people who were born lucky and take their unusual  circumstances for granted, Shawn began to notice the differences  between lucky and unlucky people at an early age. “Lucky people tend to  expand, to fill the space their luck has given them,” he writes.         We’ve become familiar with the very very lucky — billionaires who  buy penthouses in incongruously tall towers and fund politicians who  express their gratitude by revising the Internal Revenue Code so it favors  to an even greater degree the rich and especially the superrich, who then  rest their bulky elbows even more heavily on the scales of what happens  in our governing bodies, perpetuating for them what they think of as a  virtuous circle. But even many rungs farther down the wealth ladder are  many who are luckier than most people who ever lived. Shawn notes that  if you’ve lived a relatively peaceful life and not been bombed or harassed  or had to live in fear and you’ve been able to get two or three decent  meals a day, you’re lucky. And if you’ve accomplished a lot in life, it’s at  least in large part because you were lucky in the opportunities you had,  in how your path was smoothed, and in how someone helped you along  at a critical time.         So much depends on luck: your genetic makeup, the circumstances in  which you grew up, the mix of events and influences that formed your  disposition and your predispositions, the random happenings that swiveled  you in directions not of your choosing. It follows, I think, that the luckier  you’ve been, the more humility and generous spiritedness you need, and  the unluckier you’ve been, the more compassion for yourself you need,  and unfair as it may seem, the more you need irrepressible resolve.    10 
9) to consider what you have at the moment.   As a general principle, be dynamic, take initiatives, don’t be a stick in  the mud, and so forth, for sure, but there are times when it’s all  important to first think for a moment, lest later you reflect that it would  have only taken a moment —     For it falls out                  That what we have we prize not to the worth                 Whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost,                  Why, then we rack the value, then we find                  The virtue that possession would not show us                  While it was ours.                                                                                                                     Much Ado About Nothing                                                            William Shakespeare   11 
Sources Bakewell, Sarah. How to Live: A Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer. Other Press,  2010.  Campbell, Joseph. Reflections on the Art of Living: A Joseph Campbell Companion. Edited by Diane K. Osbon,  HarperCollins, 1995.  Clark, Christopher. The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914. Harper, 2014.  Dalai Lama. Beyond Religion: Ethics for a Whole World. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.  Eliot, George. The Journals of George Eliot. Edited by Margaret Harris and Judith Johnston, Cambridge University  Press, 2011.  Epictetus. Discourses, Fragments, Handbook (“Encheiridion”), §21. Translated and edited by Robin  Hard, Oxford University Press, 2014.  Hampshire, Stuart. Spinoza and Spinozism. Oxford University Press, 1951. Reprint, 2005.  Hanh, Thich Nhat. The Art of Living: Peace and Freedom in the Here and Now. HarperCollins, 2017.  Hepburn, Katharine. Quoted in The Washington Post, Nov. 10, 1990, p. A23.  Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr. “Natural Law.” Harvard Law Review, vol. 32, no. 1, Nov. 1918.  Kandel, Eric. The Disordered Mind: What Unusual Brains Tell Us About Ourselves. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2018.  Korsgaard, Christine M. Self-Constitution: Agency, Identity, and Integrity. Oxford University Press, 2009.  Matthiessen, Peter. The Snow Leopard. Viking Press, 1978.  Montaigne, Michel de. The Complete Essays of Montaigne. Translated by M. A. Screech, Penguin Classics, 1991.  Nadler, Steven. Think Least of Death: Spinoza on How to Live and How to Die. Princeton University Press, 2021.  Nagel, Thomas. The View From Nowhere. Oxford University Press, 1986.  Proust, Marcel. In Search of Lost Time. Vol. 1, translated by C. K. Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin, revised by  D. J. Enright, Modern Library, 1998.
Russell, Bertrand. Portraits from Memory and Other Essays. Routledge, 2021.  Shakespeare, William. Much Ado About Nothing. Edited by Claire McEachern, Bloomsbury Arden Shakespeare,  2016.  Shawn, Wallace. Night Thoughts. Haymarket Books, 2009.  Strawson, Galen. Things That Bother Me: Death, Freedom, the Self, Etc. New York Review Books, 2018.  Twain, Mark. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. Bantam Classic Edition, 2012.  Yeats, W. B. “The Second Coming.” (1919). In The Collected Poems of W. B. Yeats, edited by Richard J. Finneran,  rev. 2nd ed., Scribner, 1996.  12 
13