Just Let Me Select Text                                                    

[Artyom's Chaotic Blog](/) [(RSS)](/rss.xml) [About & Contacts](/about) [CV](/cv) [Uses](/uses) [Projects](/projects)

# Just Let Me Select Text

[By Artyom Bologov](about.html)

Oh, I see you disabled JavaScript. Keep up the good work, my fellow cleanweb person!

 ![A light thumbnail saying “TEX” with a text cursor after the end of it resembling “T”. “TEXT”, in other words. “EX” is highlighted with a bright pink overlay mimicking web browser selection. In the corners, attributions to “Artyom Bologov” and “aartaka.me” are visible with Ts and Vs stylized as text cursors.](assets/select-text.png)

## Untranslatable Bios [#](#bio)

I’m lonely. Like everyone-ish else. Naturally, I’m on Bumble. [(Because Tinder is a rape-friendly lure trap.)](https://themarkup.org/investigations/2025/02/13/dating-app-tinder-hinge-cover-up) When work calls get boring I inevitably start swiping (mostly left 😢)

There are lots of tourists in Armenia in the summer. From all over the world really. Speaking a stupefying range of languages. With bios and prompt answers in these numerous languages. Not necessarily discernible to me due to my language learning stagnation.

So there’s this profile of a pretty German girl. With bio and prompts in (an undeniably beautiful) German. Speaking English, she made the decision to use her mother tongue for the bio. A totally valid choice.

So I want to know the story she tells with her profile:

*   Select her bio,
*   copy it,
*   paste into a translator,
*   look up the exact meaning of some mistranslated German word,
*   and realize the unexpected poetic meaning she put into these 300 chars.

Except… I can’t do that. The text is not selectable/copyable in Bumble app. I have to do a bunch of relatively unsurmountable steps to do what should’ve taken half a minute. Like screenshot the profile and scrape the text with iOS Photos text recognition. Or use some OCR (web)app elsewhere. It’s… discouraging. Thus I give up and swipe left. A shame—she was beautiful at the very least!

## Media [#](#media)

By making the text in your UI non-selectable, you turn it into… an image essentially? Images, audio, video, and interactive JS-heavy pages are multidimentional media. Not really manipulable and referenceable in any reasonable way. [(Not even with Media Fragments—they were turned down by everyone.)](https://w3.org/TR/media-frags) You lose a whole dimension (🥁) of functionality and benefit by going with such media or their semblance text.

Podcasts are not easy to roll back to useful part. Video transcripts don’t make sense without the visuals. Web graphics are opaque `<canvas>`\-es you can’t gut.

Text is copyable. Text is translatable. Text is accessible (as in a11y.) Text is lightweight. Text is fundamental to how we people process information.

That’s why we still use text in our UIs. We want to convey the meaning. We strive to provide unambiguous instructions. We need to be understood. So why make the text harder to process and understand?

## Stop It [#](#stop)

Whenever you disable text selection/copying on your UI, you commit a crime against the user. Crime against comprehension. Crime against accessibility. Crime against the meaning. Stop incapacitating your users, allow them to finally use the text.

## Leave feedback! (via email)

Topic/subject  Feedback (required) Send (opens your email client)

This page is [Designed to Last](https://jeffhuang.com/designed_to_last) and generated on Wed Sep 24 01:11:46 +04 2025 with the help of [ed(1)](this-post-is-ed.html). You can view page sources by appending `.htm` to the page URL. You can also view alternative `.txt`, `.gmi`, `.7` (man), and `.tex` versions this way.

Copyright 2022-2025 Artyom Bologov (aartaka). Any and all opinions listed here are my own and not representative of my employers; future, past and present.