The Wind, a Pole, and the Dragon          

# [Entropic Thoughts](/)

## The Wind, a Pole, and the Dragon

*   [Home](/)
*   [Archive](/archive)
*   [Tags](/tags)
*   [About](/about)
*   [xkqr.org](https://xkqr.org/)

# The Wind, a Pole, and the Dragon

by

kqr

, published 2025-09-25

Tags:

*   [life](tags.html#life)

One of my favourite requests for help online comes from the shibboleth-users group, where [someone Japanese used machine translation to ask about the following problem](https://groups.google.com/g/shibboleth-users/c/EjvS2Cgio6c/m/m0f69QgXWQAJ):

> At often, the goat-time install a error is vomit. To how many times like the wind, a pole, and the dragon? Install 2,3 repeat, spank, vomit blows
> 
> 14:14:01.869 - INFO
> \[edu.internet2.middleware.shibboleth.common.config.profile.JSPErrorHandlerBeanDefinitionParser:45\]
> Parsing configuration for JSP error handler.
> 
> Not precise the vomit but with aspect similar, is vomited concealed in fold of goat-time lumber? goat-time see like the wind, pole, and dragon? This insult to father’s stones? JSP error handler with wind, pole, dragon with intercourse to goat-time? Or chance lack of skill with a goat-time?
> 
> Please apologize for your stupidity. There are a many thank you

I have long wanted to figure out exactly how this went so wrong. Some parts are fairly clear:

*   _vomit_ could come from _throw_ (as in throwing an error) or even just _output_.
*   _lumber_ must clearly reference _logs_.

I have also heard speculation that _goat-time_ means _runtime_, as in the Java runtime, perhaps. This means we can already figure out how we got to “vomited concealed in fold of goat-time lumber” – it’s an error hidden in the runtime logs.

I asked a few llms to assist me with the rest, and they universally think _spank_ is an odd translation of _hit_, which is apparently used in Japanese to mean something like _execute_, and _skill_ could be a mistranslation of _experience_.

We can start to put together what the message actually means.

> Often when trying to install the runtime an error is thrown. uninterpretable I have tried reinstalling it three times, but when I run it an exception is thrown.
> 
> This is not the exact exception but something like that. Is the real error hidden in the runtime logs? uninterpretable. uninterpretable arising due to interaction with the runtime? Or perhaps my lack of experience with the runtime?

The llms diverge on the meaning of “insult to father’s stones”. Some suggest the obvious thing, that it’d correspond to an idiomatic expression of frustration. Others seem to think it might be about “problems with the ancestral building blocks”, i.e. software dependencies. I liked that reading, but I have no idea.

New here? I apply the same weird curiosity to everything I discover. [To learn something new, subscribe for weekly article summaries!](https://buttondown.email/entropicthoughts) If you don't like it, you can unsubscribe any time.

Then there’s “the wind, a pole, and the dragon.” I have yet to see anything come close to a reasonable answer. llms produce guesses referring to three parts of the configuration, variable names, dependencies, colloquialisms, descriptions of user interface, or abstract descriptions of how quickly things happen (the wind), a fixed point (a pole), and complexity/power (dragon). But again, I have no idea.

If you have more information, please reach out.

If you liked this and want more you should [buy me a coffee](https://buymeacoff.ee/kqr). That helps me turn my 110+ ideas backlog into articles.

Shoutout to my amazing wife   without whose support I would never make it past the first sentence. ♥

S = k log W.  
   
Comments? [Send me an email](/about).  
You can also [subscribe for updates](https://buttondown.email/entropicthoughts).