Corral.BAS | BASIC Code                          

[

# BASIC Code

](/)

[Home](/) [About](/about/) [RSS](/feed/)[Support](http://www.patreon.com/mcoorlim) [SGDF](https://sgdf.bearblog.dev/)

# Corral.BAS

_25 Sep, 2025_

Click the gameplay window to enter commands.

Each round you can take 1-5 steps towards your horse to catch it. It'll bolt if you cover more than half the distance at once, and may kick if you get within 2 steps. Try not to get kicked.

### The Listing

PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*                                                      \*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*                         CORRAL                       \*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*                                                      \*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*   As seen in David Ahl's More BASIC Computer Games   \*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*     Converted and refactored by Michael Coorlim      \*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*                                                      \*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*"
PRINT TAB(11); "\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*"
PRINT:PRINT:PRINT

DIM A(21)
DIM S(2,9)
FOR I=1 to 2: FOR J = 0 to 9
Read S(I,J): NEXT J : NEXT I
DATA 0,1,2,3,3,2,2,1,0,-1
DATA 1,2,3,4,5,4,3,2,1,0

We initialize here. DIM sets the size of our arrays. The READ statement reads in our DATA, populating S's first two dimensions.

input "Do you want instructions?";F$
if lcase$(left$(F$,1))="y" then
	? "You're a cowboy, and you need to catch your horse in the corral. Each turn you"
  ? "can take 1-5 steps towards your horse. If you move more than halfway towards him,"
  ? "he will bolt. He may also bolt when close to the rail."
  ?
  ? "And if you get within 2 steps, he may kick... so watch out!"
end if
? "When prompted, enter from 1 to 5 for your next move's steps."

I've rewritten the instructions to be more concise.

INIT:
C=1 :REM ## The Cowboy's X position
L=1
K=0 : REM ## Kick Counter
H=0 :REM ## The Horse's X position
N=0 : REM ## Turn Number
GOSUB HORSE\_MOVES

More initialization. These variables will be reset if we play again.

if R>5 then Q=-Q
H=13+Q: GOSUB HORSE\_CLAMP : REM #Set the Horse's positon
T=2+P: ?

Horse CLAMP makes sure the horse doesn't exit our playfield.

RESET\_STATUS:
B$ = "            "
POPULATE\_A:
for J = 1 to 21: A(J)=32: NEXT J
A(C)=67:A(H)=72
? N,"I"; :REM ## Left Rail
For J = 1 to 21: ? CHR$(A(J));: NEXT J : REM ## Prints the playfield.
? "I",B$, :REM ## Right Rail and Status Message
X = ABS(H-C): L = SGN(H-C) : REM ## get the distance and direction of cowboy to horse
N=N+1: IF K>0 GOTO 640
IF N>100 THEN GOTO OUTATIME

Our primary loop begins with drawing our playfield, reading each element of the A array looking for a match to our Horse or Cowboy positions.

PROMPT:
input"Steps";D
if D<1 or D>5 THEN 
	? "You can take between 1 and 5 steps.",
	GOTO PROMPT
END IF
E = C+L\*D
IF E<1 OR E>21 THEN
	? "You cannot leave the corral.",
  GOTO PROMPT
END IF

Get player input and ensure that it's legal.

C = E: GOSUB HORSE\_MOVES
G=P: H=H+L\*G: GOSUB HORSE\_CLAMP
IF X<2\*D AND D >1 GOTO 570
IF H>1 and H<20 THEN 600
GOSUB HORSE\_MOVES
IF R>2 GOTO 600
IF X>7 GOTO RESET\_STATUS
570 G=9+2\*P: H=H-L\*G:L=-L: GOSUB HORSE\_CLAMP
IF ABS(H-C)<2 THEN H=H-3\*L:GOSUB HORSE\_CLAMP
B$="BOLTED      "
GOTO POPULATE\_A
600 IF ABS(H-C)>2 GOTO RESET\_STATUS
GOSUB HORSE\_MOVES
IF R>3 GOTO CATCH\_CHECK
GOSUB HORSE\_MOVES
K=P+2:M=M+1:H=H-5\*L:GOSUB HORSE\_CLAMP
B$="KICKED": GOTO POPULATE\_A
640 IF M>T GOTO HOSPITALIZED
K=K-1: ? : GOSUB HORSE\_MOVES
H=H+L\*(P+1):GOSUB HORSE\_CLAMP: GOTO RESET\_STATUS

More of our loop, checking for kicks and bolting if we get too close too fast.

CATCH\_CHECK:
IF H=C THEN GOTO GOTTEM
GOTO RESET\_STATUS

Did we catch the horse?

HORSE\_MOVES:
R = int(rnd(1)\*10)
P=S(1,R)
Q=S(2,R)
RETURN

HORSE\_CLAMP:
REM ## MAKES SURE THE HORSE STAYS IN THE PLAYFIELD ##
IF H<1 THEN H = 1 
if H>21 THEN H =21
RETURN

Give our horse its movement for the round.

HOSPITALIZED:
?:? "That last kick lands you in the hospital!"
? "  Get well soon, champ!"
GOTO PLAY\_AGAIN:

OUTATIME:
?:?"That darn horse done give you the slip!"
GOTO PLAY\_AGAIN

GOTTEM:
FOR J=1 to 21: A(J)=32: NEXT J:A(C)=35
? "I";
FOR J=1 to 21: ? CHR$(A(J));:NEXT J
?"I"
?:?"Congrats! You caught him! Now see if you can do it in fewer moves!"

PLAY\_AGAIN:
input "Another roundup";F$
if lcase$(left$(F$,1))="y" then GOTO Init
END

Game over states and the play again query.

[#David Ahl](/blog/?q=David Ahl)

   1

©2025 Michael Coorlim - [Support my work on Patreon](http://www.patreon.com/mcoorlim) - [One-Time Ko-Fi donation](https://ko-fi.com/mcoorlim)

Powered by [Bear ʕ•ᴥ•ʔ](https://bearblog.dev)