Finding and Understanding Bugs in C Compilers Xuejun YangYang ChenEric EideJohn Regehr University of Utah, School of Computing { jxyang,chenyang, eeide, regehr}@cs.utah.edu Abstract Compilers should be correct. To improve the quality of C compilers, we created Csmith, a randomized test-case generation tool, and spent three years using it to find compiler bugs. During this period we reported more than 325 previously unknown bugs to compiler developers. Every compiler we tested was found to crash and also to silently generate wrong code when presented with valid input.
In this paper we present our compiler-testing tool and the results of our bug-hunting study. Our first contribution is to advance the state of the art in compiler testing. Unlike previous tools, Csmith generates programs that cover a large subset of C while avoiding the undefined and unspecified behaviors that would destroy its ability to automatically find wrong-code bugs. Our second contribution is a collection of qualitative and quantitative results about the bugs we have found in open-source C compilers.
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.5 [Software Engineer- ing]: Testing and Debugging—testing tools;   D.3.2 [Programming Languages]: Language Classifications—C;   D.3.4 [Programming Languages]: Processors—compilers General TermsLanguages, Reliability Keywords compiler testing, compiler defect, automated testing, random testing, random program generation 1.    Introduction The theory of compilation is well developed, and there are compiler frameworks in which many optimizations have been proved correct.
Nevertheless, the practical art of compiler construction involves a morass of trade-offs between compilation speed, code quality, code debuggability, compiler modularity, compiler retargetability, and other goals. It should be no surprise that optimizing compilers—like all complex software systems—contain bugs.
Miscompilations  often  happen  because  optimization  safety checks  are  inadequate,  static  analyses  are  unsound,  or  transfor- mations are flawed. These bugs are out of reach for current and future automated program-verification tools because the specifica- tions that need to be checked were never written down in a precise way, if they were written down at all. Where verification is imprac- tical, however, other methods for improving compiler quality can succeed. This paper reports our experience in using testing to make C compilers better.
c ©ACM, 2011. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use. Not for redistribution.
The  definitive  version  was  published  inProceedings  of  the  2011  ACM  SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), San Jose, CA, Jun. 2011,http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/NNNNNNN.NNNNNNN 1int foo (void) { 2signed char x = 1; 3unsigned char y = 255; 4return x > y; 5} Figure 1.We found a bug in the version of GCC that shipped with Ubuntu Linux 8.04.1 for x86. At all optimization levels it compiles this function to return1; the correct result is0. The Ubuntu compiler was heavily patched; the base version of GCC did not have this bug.
We created Csmith, a randomized test-case generator that sup- ports compiler bug-hunting using differential testing. Csmith gen- erates a C program; a test harness then compiles the program us- ing several compilers, runs the executables, and compares the out- puts. Although this compiler-testing approach has been used be- fore [6,16,23], Csmith’s test-generation techniques substantially advance the state of the art by generating random programs that are expressive—containing complex code using many C language features—while also ensuring that every generated program has a single interpretation. To have a unique interpretation, a program must not execute any of the 191 kinds of undefined behavior, nor depend on any of the 52 kinds of unspecified behavior, that are described in the C99 standard.
For the past three years, we have used Csmith to discover bugs in C compilers. Our results are perhaps surprising in their extent: to date, we have found and reported more than 325 bugs in mainstream C compilers including GCC, LLVM, and commercial tools.Figure1 shows a representative example. Every compiler that we have tested, including several that are routinely used to compile safety-critical embedded systems, has been crashed and also shown to silently miscompile valid inputs. As measured by the responses to our bug reports, the defects discovered by Csmith are important. Most of the  bugs  we  have  reported  against  GCC  and  LLVM  have  been fixed. Twenty-five of our reported GCC bugs have been classified as P1, the maximum, release-blocking priority for GCC defects. Our results suggest that fixed test suites—the main way that compilers are tested—are an inadequate mechanism for quality control.
We claim that Csmith is an effective bug-finding tool in part because it generates tests that explore atypical combinations of C language features. Atypical code isnotunimportant code, how- ever; it is simply underrepresented in fixed compiler test suites.
Developers who stray outside the well-tested paths that represent a compiler’s “comfort zone”—for example by writing kernel code or embedded systems code, using esoteric compiler options, or au- tomatically generating code—can encounter bugs quite frequently.
This is a significant problem for complex systems. Wolfe [30], talk- ing about independent software vendors (ISVs) says: “An ISV with a complex code can work around correctness, turn off the optimizer in one or two files,and usually they have to do that for any of the compilers they use” (emphasis ours). As another example, the front 1 
page of the Web site for GMP, the GNU Multiple Precision Arith- metic Library, states, “Most problems with compiling GMP these days are due to problems not in GMP, but with the compiler.” Improving  the  correctness  of  C  compilers  is  a  worthy  goal: C code is part of the trusted computing base for almost every modern computer system including mission-critical financial servers and life- critical pacemaker firmware. Large-scale source-code verification efforts such as the seL4 OS kernel [12] and Airbus’s verification of fly-by-wire software [24] can be undermined by an incorrect C compiler. The need for correct compilers is amplified because operating systems are almost always written in C and because C is  used  as  a  portable  assembly  language.  It  is  targeted  by  code generators from a wide variety of high-level languages including Matlab/Simulink,  which  is  used  to  generate  code  for  industrial control systems.
Despite recent advances in compiler verification, testing is still needed. First, a verified compiler is only as good as its specification of the source and target language semantics, and these specifications are themselves complex and error-prone. Second, formal verification seldom provides end-to-end guarantees: “details” such as parsers, libraries,  and  file  I/O  usually  remain  in  the  trusted  computing base. This second point is illustrated by our experience in testing CompCert [14], a verified C compiler. Using Csmith, we found previously unknown bugs in unproved parts of CompCert—bugs that cause this compiler to silently produce incorrect code.
Our goal was to discover serious, previously unknown bugs: • in mainstream C compilers like GCC and LLVM; • that manifest when compiling core language constructs such as arithmetic, arrays, loops, and function calls; • targeting ubiquitous architectures such as x86 and x86-64; and • using mundane optimization flags such as –O and –O2.
This paper reports our experience in achieving this goal. Our first contribution is to advance the state of the art in compiler test-case generation, finding—as far as we know—many more previously unknown  compiler  bugs  than  any  similar  effort  has  found.  Our second contribution is to qualitatively and quantitatively characterize the bugs found by Csmith: What do they look like? In what parts of the compilers are they primarily found? How are they distributed across a range of compiler versions?
2.    Csmith Csmith  began  as  a  fork  of  Randprog  [27],  an  existing  random C program generator about 1,600 lines long. In earlier work, we extended  and  adapted  Randprog  to  find  bugs  in  C  compilers’ translation of accesses to volatile-qualified objects [6], resulting in a 7,000-line program. Our previous paper showed that in many cases, these bugs could be worked around by turning volatile-object accesses into calls to helper functions. The key observation was this: while the rules regarding the addition, elimination, and reordering of accesses to volatile objects are not at all like the rules governing ordinary variable accesses in C, they are almost identical to the rules governing function calls.
For some test programs generated by Randprog, our rewriting procedure was insufficient to correct a defect that we had found in the C compiler. Our hypothesis was that this was always due to “reg- ular” compiler bugs not related to the volatile qualifier. To investigate these compiler defects, we shifted our research emphasis toward looking for generic wrong-code bugs. We turned Randprog into Csmith, a 40,000-line C++ program for randomly generating C pro- grams. Compared to Randprog, Csmith can generate C programs that utilize a much wider range of C features including complex control flow and data structures such as pointers, arrays, and structs.
Most of Csmith’s complexity arises from the requirement that it output execute compiler 1 Csmith no bug majorityminority bug execute compiler 3 compare execute compiler 2 Figure 2.Finding bugs in three compilers using randomized differ- ential testing interleave static analysis with code generation in order to produce meaningful test cases, as described below.
2.1    Randomized Differential Testing using Csmith Random testing [9], also called fuzzing [17], is a black-box testing method in which test inputs are generated randomly. Randomized differential testing [16] has the advantage that no oracle for test results is needed. It exploits the idea that if one has multiple, deter- ministic implementations of the same specification, all implementa- tions must produce the same result from the same valid input. When two implementations produce different outputs, one of them must be faulty. Given three or more implementations, a tester can use voting to heuristically determine which implementations are wrong.
Figure 2 shows how we use these ideas to find compiler bugs.
2.2    Design Goals Csmith has two main design goals. First and most important, every generated program must be well formed and have a single meaning according to the C standard. The meaning of a C program is the sequence of side effects it performs. The principal side effect of a Csmith-generated program is to print a value summarizing the com- putation performed by the program.
1 This value is a checksum of the program’s non-pointer global variables at the end of the program’s execution. Thus, if changing the compiler or compiler options causes the checksum emitted by a Csmith-generated program to change, a compiler bug has been found.
The  C99  language  [11]  has  191undefined  behaviors—e.g., dereferencing a null pointer or overflowing a signed integer—that destroy  the  meaning  of  a  program.  It  also  has  52unspecified behaviors—e.g., the order of evaluation of arguments to a function— where  a  compiler  may  choose  from  a  set  of  options  with  no requirement that the choice be made consistently. Programs emitted by Csmith must avoid all of these behaviors or, in certain cases such as argument-evaluation order, be independent of the choices that will be made by the compiler. Many undefined and unspecified behaviors can be avoided structurally by generating programs in such  a  way  that  problems  never  arise.  However,  a  number  of important undefined and unspecified behaviors are not easy to avoid in a structural fashion. In these cases, Csmith solves the problem using static analysis and by adding run-time checks to the generated code.Section2.4 describes the hazards that Csmith must avoid and its strategies for avoiding them.
Csmith’s  second  design  goal  is  to  maximize  expressiveness subject to constraints imposed by the first goal. An “expressive” generator supports many language features and combinations of features. Our hypothesis is that expressiveness is correlated with bug-finding power.
1 Accesses to volatile objects are also side effects as described in the C standard.  We  do  not  discuss  these  “secondary”  side  effects  of  Csmith- generated programs further in this paper.
2 
Csmith creates programs with the following features: • function definitions, and global and local variable definitions • most kinds of C expressions and statements • control  flow:if/else,  function  calls,forloops,return, break,continue,goto • signed and unsigned integers of all standard widths • arithmetic, logical, and bitwise operations on integers • structs: nested, and with bit-fields • arrays of and pointers to all supported types, including pointers and arrays • theconstandvolatiletype qualifiers, including at different levels of indirection for pointer-typed variables The most important language features not currently supported by Csmith are strings, dynamic memory allocation, floating-point types, unions, recursion, and function pointers. We plan to add some of these features to future versions of our tool.
2.3    Randomly Generating Programs The shape of a program generated by Csmith is governed by a grammar  for  a  subset  of  C.  A  program  is  a  collection  of  type, variable, and function definitions; a function body is a block; a block contains a list of declarations and a list of statements; and a statement is an expression, control-flow construct (e.g.,if,return, goto, orfor), assignment, or block. Assignments are modeled as statements—not expressions—which reflects the most common idiom  for  assignments  in  C  code.  We  leverage  our  grammar  to produce other idiomatic code as well: in particular, we include a statement kind that represents a loop iterating over an array. The grammar is implemented by a collection of hand-coded C++ classes.
Csmith  maintains  aglobal  environmentthat  holds  top-level definitions: i.e., types, global variables, and functions. The global environment is extended as new entities are defined during program generation. To hold information relevant to the current program- generation point, Csmith also maintains alocal environmentwith three primary kinds of information. First, the local environment describes the current call chain, supporting context-sensitive pointer analysis. Second, it contains effect information describing objects that may have been read or written since (1) the start of the current function, (2) the start of the current statement, and (3) the previous sequence  point.
2 Third,  the  local  environment  carries  points-to facts about all in-scope pointers. These elements and their roles in program generation are further described in Section 2.4.
Csmith begins by randomly creating a collection of struct type declarations. For each, it randomly decides on a number of members and  the  type  of  each  member.  The  type  of  a  member  may  be a  (possibly  qualified)  integral  type,  a  bit-field,  or  a  previously generated struct type.
After the preliminary step of producing type definitions, Csmith begins to generate C program code. Csmith generates a program top-down, starting from a single function called bymain. Each step of the program generator involves the following sub-steps: 1.
Csmith randomly selects an allowable production from its gram- mar for the current program point. To make the choice, it consults 2 As explained in Section 3.8 of the C FAQ [25], “A sequence point is a point in time at which the dust has settled and all side effects which have been seen so far are guaranteed to be complete. The sequence points listed in the C standard are at the end of the evaluation of a full expression (a full expression is an expression statement, or any other expression which is not a subexpression within any larger expression); at the||,&&,?:, and comma operators; and at a function call (after the evaluation of all the arguments, and just before the actual call).” a probability table and a filter function specific to the current point: there is a table/filter pair for statements, another for ex- pressions, and so on. The table assigns a probability to each of the alternatives, where the sum of the probabilities is one.
After choosing a production from the table, Csmith executes the filter, which decides if the choice is acceptable in the current con- text. Filters enforce basic semantic restrictions (e.g.,continue can only appear within a loop), user-controllable limits (e.g., maximum statement depth and number of functions), and other user-controllable options. If the filter rejects the selected pro- duction, Csmith simply loops back, making selections from the table until the filter succeeds.
2.If the selected production requires a target—e.g., a variable or function—then the generator randomly selects an appropriate target or defines a new one. In essence, Csmith dynamically constructs a probability table for the potential targets and in- cludes an option to create a new target. Function and variable definitions are thus created “on demand” at the time that Csmith decides to refer to them.
3.If the selected production allows the generator to select a type, Csmith randomly chooses one. Depending on the current context, the choice may be restricted (e.g., while generating the operands of  an  integral-typed  expression)  or  unrestricted  (e.g.,  while generating the types of parameters to a new function). Random choices are guided by the grammar, probability tables, and filters as already described.
4.
If the selected production is nonterminal, the generator recurses.
It calls a function to generate the program fragment that corre- sponds to the nonterminal production. More generally, Csmith recurses for each nonterminal element of the current production: e.g., for each subcomponent of a compound statement, or for each parameter in a function call.
5.Csmith executes a collection of dataflow transfer functions. It passes  the  points-to  facts  from  the  local  environment  to  the transfer functions, which produce a new set of points-to facts.
Csmith updates the local environment with these facts.
6.Csmith executes a collection of safety checks. If the checks succeed, the new code fragment is committed to the generated program. Otherwise, the fragment is dropped and any changes to the local environment are rolled back.
When Csmith creates a call to a new function—one whose body does not yet exist—generation of the current function is suspended until the new function is finished. Thus, when the top-level function has been completely generated, Csmith is finished. At that point it  pretty-prints  all  of  the  randomly  generated  definitions  in  an appropriate order: types, globals, prototypes, and functions. Finally, Csmith outputs amainfunction. Themainfunction calls the top- level randomly generated function, computes a checksum of the non-pointer global variables, prints the checksum, and exits.
2.4    Safety Mechanisms Table1 lists the mechanisms that Csmith uses to avoid generating C programs that execute undefined behaviors or depend on unspecified behaviors. This section provides additional detail about the hazards that Csmith must avoid and its strategies for avoiding them.
Integer  safety More  and  more,  compilers  are  aggressively  ex- ploiting the undefined nature of integer behaviors such as signed overflow and shift-past-bitwidth. For example, recent versions of Intel CC, GCC, and LLVM evaluate(x+1)>xto1while also eval- uating(INT_MAX+1)toINT_MIN. In another example, discovered by the authors of Google’s Native Client software [3], routine refac- toring of C code caused the expression1<<32to be evaluated on a 3 
Code-Generation-Code-Execution- Problem Time SolutionTime Solution use without initializationexplicit initializers,— avoid jumping over initializers qualifier mismatchstatic analysis— infinite recursiondisallow recursion— signed integer overflow bounded loop varssafe math wrappers OOB array access bounded loop varsforce index in bounds unspecified eval. ordereffect analysis— of function arguments R/W and W/W conflictseffect analysis— betw. sequence points access to out-of-scopepointer analysis— stack variable null pointer dereferencepointer analysisnull pointer checks Table 1.Summary of Csmith’s strategies for avoiding undefined and unspecified behaviors. When both a code-generation-time and code-execution-time solution are listed, Csmith uses both.
platform with 32-bit integers. The compiler exploited this undefined behavior to turn a sandboxing safety check into a nop.
To  keep  Csmith-generated  programs  from  executing  integer undefined behaviors, we implemented a family of wrapper functions for arithmetic operators whose (promoted) operands might overflow.
This was not difficult, but had a few tricky aspects. For example, the  C99  standard  does  not  explicitly  identify  the  evaluation  of INT_MIN%-1as being an undefined behavior, but most compilers treat it as such. The C99 standard also has very restrictive semantics for  signed  left-shift:  it  is  illegal  (for  implementations  using  2’s complement integers) to shift a 1-bit into or past the sign bit. Thus, evaluating1<<31destroys the meaning of a C99 program on a platform with 32-bit ints.
Several safe math libraries for C that we examined themselves ex- ecute operations with undefined behavior while performing checks.
Apparently, avoiding such behavior is indeed a tricky business.
Type  safetyThe  aspect  of  C’s  type  system  that  required  the most care wasqualifier safety: ensuring thatconstandvolatile qualifiers attached to pointers at various levels of indirection are not removed by implicit casts. Accessing a const- or volatile-qualified object through a non-qualified pointer results in undefined behavior.
Pointer safetyNull-pointer dereferences are easy to avoid using dynamic checks. There is, on the other hand, no portable run-time method for detecting references to a function-scoped variable whose lifetime has ended. (Hacks involving the stack pointer are not robust under inlining.) Although there are obvious ways to structurally avoid this problem, such as using a type system to ensure that a pointer to a function-scoped variable never outlives the function, we judged this kind of strategy to be too restrictive. Instead, Csmith freely permits pointers to local variables to escape (e.g., into global variables) but uses a whole-program pointer analysis to ensure that such pointers are not dereferenced or used in comparisons once they become invalid.
Csmith’s pointer analysis is flow sensitive, field sensitive, context sensitive, path insensitive, and array-element insensitive. Apoints-to fact is an explicit set of locations that may be referenced, and may include two special elements: the null pointer and the invalid (out- of-scope) pointer.Points-tosets containing a single element serve as must-alias facts unless thepointed-toobject is an array element.
Because  Csmith  does  not  generate  programs  that  use  the  heap, assigning names to storage locations is trivial.
Effect safetyThe C99 standard states that “[t]he order of evalua- tion of the function designator, the actual arguments, and subexpres- sions within the actual arguments is unspecified.” Also, undefined behavior occurs if “[b]etween two sequence points, an object is modified more than once, or is modified and the prior value is read other than to determine the value to be stored.” To avoid these problems, Csmith uses its pointer analysis to perform a conservative interprocedural analysis and determine the effectof every expression, statement, and function that it generates.
An  effect  consists  of  two  sets:  locations  that  may  be  read  and locations that may be written. Csmith ensures that no location is both read and written, or written more than once, between any pair of sequence points. As a special case, in an assignment, a location can be read on the RHS and also written on the LHS.
Effects are computed, and effect safety guaranteed, incrementally.
At each sequence point, Csmith resets the current effect (i.e., may- read  and  may-write  sets).  As  fragments  of  code  are  generated, Csmith tests if the new code has a read/write or write/write conflict with the current effect. If a conflict is detected, the new code is thrown away and the process restarts. For example, if Csmith is generating an expressionp + func()and it happens thatfuncmay modifyp, the call tofuncis discarded and a new subexpression is generated. If there is no conflict, the read and write sets are updated and the process continues. Probabilistic progress is guaranteed: by design, Csmith always has a non-zero chance of generating code that introduces no new conflicts, such as a constant expression.
Array safetyCsmith uses several methods to ensure that array indices are in bounds. First, it generates index variables that are modified only in the “increment” parts offorloops and whose values never exceed the bounds of the arrays being indexed. Second, variables with arbitrary value are forced to be in bounds using the modulo operator. Finally, as needed, Csmith emits explicit checks against array lengths.
Initializer  safetyA  C  program  must  not  use  an  uninitialized function-scoped  variable.  For  the  most  part,  initializer  safety  is easy to ensure structurally by initializing variables close to where they are declared. Gotos introduce the possibility that initializers may be jumped over; Csmith solves this by forbidding gotos from spanning initialization code.
2.5    Efficient Global Safety Csmith never commits to a code fragment unless it has been shown to be safe. However, loops and function calls threaten to invalidate previously validated code. For example, consider the following code, in which Csmith has just added the loop back-edge at line 7.
1int i; 2int *p = &i; 3while (...) { 4*p = 3; 5...
6p = 0; 7} The  assignment  throughpat  line  4  was  safe  when  it  was generated. However, the newly added line 7 makes line 4 unsafe, due to the back-edge carrying a null-valuedp.
One solution to this problem is to be conservative: run the whole- program dataflow analysis before committing any new statement to the program. This is not efficient. We therefore restrict the analysis to local scope except when function calls and loops are involved. For a function call, the callee is re-analyzed at each call site immediately.
Csmith uses a different strategy for loops. This is because so many statements are inside loops, and the extra calls to the dataflow analysis add substantial overhead to the code generator. Csmith’s strategy is to optimistically generate code that islocally safe. Local safety includes running a single step of the dataflow engine (which reaches a sound result when generating code not inside any loop).
4 
The global fixpoint analysis is run when a loop is closed by adding its back-edge. If Csmith finds that the program contains unsafe statements, it deletes code starting from the tail of the loop until the program becomes globally safe. This strategy is about three times faster than pessimistically running the global dataflow analysis before adding every piece of code.
2.6    Design Trade-offs Allow implementation-defined behaviorAn ideally portable test program would be “strictly conforming” to the C language standard.
This means that the program’s output would be independent of all unspecified and unspecified behaviors and, in addition, be indepen- dent of anyimplementation-defined behavior. C99 has 114 kinds of implementation-defined behavior, and they have pervasive impact on the behavior of real C programs. For example, the result of per- forming a bitwise operation on a signed integer is implementation- defined, and operands to arithmetic operations are implicitly cast to int(which has implementation-defined width) before performing the operation. We believe it is impossible to generate realistically ex- pressive C code that retains a single interpretation across all possible choices of implementation-defined behaviors.
Programs generated by Csmith do not generate the same output across compilers that differ in (1) the width and representation of integers, (2) behavior when casting to a signed integer type when the value cannot be represented in an object of the target type, and (3) the results of bitwise operations on signed integers. In practice there is not much diversity in how C implementations define these behaviors. For mainstream desktop and embedded targets, there are roughly three equivalence classes of compiler targets: those whereintis 32 bits andlongis 64 bits (e.g., x86-64), those where intandlongare 32 bits (e.g., x86, ARM, and PowerPC), and those whereintis 16 bits andlongis 32 bits (e.g., MSP430 and AVR). Using Csmith, we can perform differential testing within an equivalence class but not across classes.
No ground truthCsmith’s programs are not self-checking: we are unable to predict their outputs without running them. This is not a problem when we use Csmith for randomized differential testing.
We have never seen an “interesting” split vote where randomized differential testing of a collection of C compilers fails to produce a clear consensus answer, nor have we seen any cases in which a majority of tested compilers produces the same incorrect result.
(We  would  catch  the  problem  by  hand  as  part  of  verifying  the failure-inducing  program.)  In  fact,  we  have  not  seen  even  two unrelated compilers produce the same incorrect output for a Csmith- generated test case. It therefore seems unlikely that all compilers under test would produce the same incorrect output for a test case.
Of course, if that did happen we would not detect that problem; this is an inherent limitation of differential testing without an oracle.
In summary, despite the fact that Knight and Leveson [13] found a substantial number of correlated errors in an experiment on N- version programming, Csmith has yielded no evidence of correlated failures among unrelated C compilers. Our hypothesis is that the observed lack of correlation stems from the fact that most compiler bugs are in passes that operate on an intermediate representation and there is substantial diversity among IRs.
No guarantee of terminationIt is not difficult to generate random programs that always terminate. However, we judged that this would limit Csmith’s expressiveness too much: for example, it would force loops  to  be  highly  structured.  Additionally,  always-terminating tests cannot find compiler bugs that wrongfully terminate a non- terminating program. (We have found bugs of this kind.) About 10% of the programs generated by Csmith are (apparently) non- terminating. In practice, during testing, they are easy to deal with using timeouts.
Target  middle-end  bugsCommercial  test  suites  for  C  compil- ers [1,19,20] are primarily aimed at checking standards confor- mance. Csmith, on the other hand, is mainly intended to find bugs in the parts of a compiler that perform transformations on an interme- diate representation—the so-called “middle end” of a compiler. As a result, we have found large numbers of middle-end bugs missed by existing testing techniques (Section3.6). At the same time, Csmith is rather poor at finding gaps in standards conformance. For example, it makes no attempt to test a compiler’s handling of trigraphs, long identifier names, or variadic functions.
Targeting the middle end has several aspects. First, all generated programs pass the lexer, parser, and typechecker. Second, we per- formed substantial manual tuning of the 80 probabilities that govern Csmith’s random choices. Our goal was to make the generated pro- grams “look right”—to contain a balanced mix of arithmetic and bitwise operations, of references to scalars and aggregates, of loops and straight-line code, of single-level and multi-level indirections, and so on. Third, Csmith specifically generates idiomatic code (e.g., loops that access all elements of an array) to stress-test parts of the compiler we believe to be error-prone. Fourth, we designed Csmith with an eye toward generating programs that exercise the constructs of a compiler’s intermediate representation, and we decided to avoid generating source-level diversity that is unlikely to improve the “coverage” of a compiler’s intermediate representations. For exam- ple, since additional levels of parentheses around expressions are stripped away early in the compilation process, we do not generate them, nor do we generate all of C’s syntactic loop forms since they are typically all lowered to the same IR constructs. Finally, Csmith was designed to be fast enough that it can generate programs that are a few tens of thousands of lines long in a few seconds. Large programs are preferred because (empirically—seeSection3.3) they find more bugs. In summary, many aspects of Csmith’s design and implementation were informed by our understanding of how modern compilers work and how they break.
3.    Results We conducted five experiments using Csmith, our random program generator. This section summarizes our findings.
Our first experiment was uncontrolled and unstructured: over a three-year period, we opportunistically found and reported bugs in a variety of C compilers. We found bugs in all the compilers we tested—hundreds of defects, many classified as high-priority bugs.
(§3.1) In the second experiment, we compiled and ran one million random programs using several years’ worth of versions of GCC and LLVM, to understand how their robustness is evolving over time.
As measured by our tests over the programs that Csmith produces, the quality of both compilers is generally improving. (§3.2) Third, we evaluated Csmith’s bug-finding power as a function of the size of the generated C programs. The largest number of bugs is found at a surprisingly large program size: about 81 KB. (§3.3) Fourth, we compared Csmith’s bug-finding power to that of four previous random C program generators. Over a week, Csmith was able to find significantly more distinct compiler crash errors than previous program generators could. (§3.4) Finally, we investigated the effect of testing random programs on branch, function, and line coverage of the GCC and LLVM source code. We found that these metrics did not significantly improve when we added randomly generated programs to the compilers’ existing test suites. Nevertheless, as shown by our other results, Csmith-generated programs allowed us to discover bugs that are missed by the compilers’ standard test suites. (§3.5) We conclude the presentation of results by analyzing some of the bugs we found in GCC and LLVM. (§3.6, §3.7) 5 
GCCLLVM Crash210 Wrong code29 Total419 Table 2.Crash and wrong-code bugs found by Csmith that manifest when  compiler  optimizations  are  disabled  (i.e.,  when  the–O0 command-line option is used) 3.1    Opportunistic Bug Finding We reported bugs to 11 different C compiler development teams.
Five of these compilers (GCC, LLVM, CIL, TCC, and Open64) were open source and five were commercial products. The eleventh, CompCert, is publicly available but not open source.
What kinds of bugs are there?It is useful to distinguish between errors whose symptoms manifest at compile time and those that only manifest when the compiler’s output is executed. Compile- time bugs that we see include assertion violations or other internal compiler errors; involuntary compiler termination due to memory- safety problems; and cases in which the compiler exhausts the RAM or CPU time allocated to it. We say that a compile-timecrash error has occurred whenever the compiler process exits with a status other than zero or fails to produce executable output. Errors that manifest at run time include the computation of a wrong result; a crash or other abnormal termination of the generated code; termination of a program that should have executed forever; and non-termination of a program that should have terminated. We refer to these run-time problems aswrong-code errors. Asilent wrong-code erroris one that occurs in a program that was produced without any sort of warning from the compiler; i.e., the compiler silently miscompiled the test program.
Experience with commercial compilersThere exist many more commercial C compilers than we could easily test. The ones we chose to study are fairly popular and were produced by what we believe are some of the strongest C compiler development teams.
Csmith found wrong-code errors and crash errors in each of these tools within a few hours of testing.
Because we are not paying customers, and because our findings represent potential bad publicity, we did not receive a warm response from any commercial compiler vendor. Thus, for the most part, we simply tested these compilers until we found a few crash errors and a few wrong-code errors, reported them, and moved on.
Experience with open-source compilersFor several reasons, the bulk of our testing effort went towards GCC and LLVM. First and most important, compiler testing is inherently interactive: we require feedback  from  the  development  team  in  the  form  of  bug  fixes.
Bugs that occur with high probability can mask tricky, one-in-a- million bugs; thus, testing proceeds most smoothly when we can help developers rapidly destroy the easy bugs. Both the GCC and LLVM teams were responsive to our bug reports. The LLVM team in particular fixed bugs quickly, often within a few hours and usually within a week. The second reason we prefer dealing with open- source compilers is that their development process is transparent: we can watch the mailing lists, participate in discussions, and see fixes as they are committed. Third, we want to help harden the open-source development tools that we and many others use daily.
So far we have reported 79 GCC bugs and 202 LLVM bugs—the latter figure represents about 2% of all LLVM bug reports. Most of our reported bugs have been fixed, and twenty-five of the GCC bugs were marked by developers as P1: the maximum, release-blocking priority for a bug. To date, we have reported 325 in total across all tested compilers (GCC, LLVM, and others).
An  error  that  occurs  at  the  lowest  level  of  optimization  is pernicious because it defeats the conventional wisdom that compiler bugs can be avoided by turning off the optimizer.Table2 counts these kinds of bugs, causing both crash and wrong-code errors, that we found using Csmith.
Testing CompCertCompCert [14] is a verified, optimizing com- piler for a large subset of C; it targets PowerPC, ARM, and x86. We put significant effort into testing this compiler.
The first silent wrong-code error that we found in CompCert was due to a miscompilation of this function: 1int bar (unsigned x) { 2return -1 <= (1 && x); 3} CompCert 1.6 for PowerPC generates code returning0, but the proper result is1because the comparison is signed. This bug and five others like it were in CompCert’s unverified front-end code. Partly in response to these bug reports, the main CompCert developer expanded the verified portion of CompCert to include C’s integer promotions and other tricky implicit casts.
The second CompCert problem we found was illustrated by two bugs that resulted in generation of code like this: stwu r1, -44432(r1) Here, a large PowerPC stack frame is being allocated. The problem is  that  the  16-bit  displacement  field  is  overflowed.  CompCert’s PPC semantics failed to specify a constraint on the width of this immediate value, on the assumption that the assembler would catch out-of-range values. In fact, this is what happened. We also found a handful of crash errors in CompCert.
The striking thing about our CompCert results is that the middle- end bugs we found in all other compilers are absent. As of early 2011, the under-development version of CompCert is the only compiler we have tested for which Csmith cannot find wrong-code errors. This is not for lack of trying: we have devoted about six CPU-years to the task. The apparent unbreakability of CompCert supports a strong argument that developing compiler optimizations within a proof framework, where safety checks are explicit and machine-checked, has tangible benefits for compiler users.
3.2    Quantitative Comparison of GCC and LLVM Versions Figure 3  shows  the  results  of  an  experiment  in  which  we  com- piled  and  ran  1,000,000  randomly  generated  programs  using LLVM1.9–2.8,  GCC3.[0–4].0,  and  GCC4.[0–5].0.  Every  pro- gram was compiled at–O0,–O1,–O2,–Os, and–O3. A test case was considered valid if every compiler terminated (successfully or otherwise) within five minutes and if every compiled random program terminated (correctly or otherwise) within five seconds. All compilers targeted x86. Running these tests took about 1.5 weeks on 20 machines in the Utah Emulab testbed [28]. Each machine had one quad-core Intel Xeon E5530 processor running at 2.4 GHz.
Compile-time failuresThe top row of graphs inFigure3 shows the observed rate of crash errors. (Note that they-axesof these graphs are logarithmic.) These graphs also indicate the number of crash bugs that were fixed in response to our bug reports. Both compilers became at least three orders of magnitude less “crashy” over the range of versions covered in this experiment. The GCC results appear to tell a nice story: the 3.x release series increases in quality, the 4.0.0 release regresses because it represents a major change to GCC’s internals, and then quality again starts to improve.
The middle row of graphs inFigure3 shows the number of distinct  assertion  failuresin  LLVM  and  the  number  ofdistinct internal compiler errorsin GCC induced by our tests. These are the numbers of code locations in LLVM and GCC at which an internal 6 
 0.0001  0.001  0.01  0.1  1  10 1.92.02.12.22.32.42.52.62.72.8 Crash Error Rate (%) LLVM version 4.556% 3.195% 3.308% 4.729% 0.9318% 0.6804%0.6797% 0.0908% 0.0134% 0.0022% 4 bugs fixed21 bugs fixed13 bugs fixed27 bugs fixed26 bugs fixed22 bugs fixed  0.0001  0.001  0.01  0.1  1  10 3.0.03.1.03.2.03.3.03.4.04.0.04.1.04.2.04.3.04.4.04.5.0 Crash Error Rate (%) GCC version 9.105% 0.2046% 0.1891% 0.1717% 0.0474% 4.789% 2.614% 5.567% 6.117% 0.0026% 0.0003% 21 bugs fixed11 bugs fixed  0  5  10  15  20  25  30 1.92.02.12.22.32.42.52.62.72.8 Distinct Assert Failures LLVM version 27 20 18 2222 12 13 7 10 1 4 bugs fixed21 bugs fixed13 bugs fixed27 bugs fixed26 bugs fixed22 bugs fixed  0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14 3.0.03.1.03.2.03.3.03.4.04.0.04.1.04.2.04.3.04.4.04.5.0 Distinct Internal Compiler Errors GCC version 10 11 9 77 11 7 6 14 5 0 21 bugs fixed11 bugs fixed  0.0001  0.001  0.01  0.1  1  10 1.92.02.12.22.32.42.52.62.72.8 Wrong Code Error Rate (%) LLVM version 0.2058% 0.1667% 0.1257% 0.1661% 0.9414% 7.542% 0.1847% 0.2491% 0.03% 0.0002% 4 bugs fixed16 bugs fixed11 bugs fixed6 bugs fixed7 bugs fixed11 bugs fixed  0.0001  0.001  0.01  0.1  1  10 3.0.03.1.03.2.03.3.03.4.04.0.04.1.04.2.04.3.04.4.04.5.0 Wrong Code Error Rate (%) GCC version 0.0416% 0.0147% 0.0133% 0.0062% 0.0127% 0.0178% 0.0426% 0.0379%0.0378% 0.0103% 0.0054% 5 bugs fixed11 bugs fixed Figure 3.Distinct crash errors found, and rates of crash and wrong-code errors, from recent LLVM and GCC versions consistency check failed. These graphs conservatively estimate the number of distinct failures in these compilers, since we encountered many segmentation faults caused by use of free memory, null-pointer dereferences, and similar problems. We did not include these faults in our graphed results due to the difficulty of mapping crashes back to distinct causes.
It  is  not  clear  which  of  these  two  metrics  of  crashiness  is preferable. The rate of crashes is easy to game: we can make it arbitrarily high by biasing Csmith to generate code triggering known bugs, and compiler writers can reduce it to zero by eliminating error messages and always returning a “success” status code to the operating system. The number of distinct crashes, on the other hand, suffers from the drawback that it depends on the quantity and style of assertions in the compiler under test. Although GCC has more total assertions than LLVM, LLVM has a higher density: about one assertion per 100 lines of code, compared to one in 250 for GCC.
Run-time failuresThe bottom pair of graphs inFigure3 shows the rate of wrong-code errors in our experiment. Unfortunately, we 7 
 0  10  20  30  40  50  60 5-8 9-16 17-3233-64 65-128 129-256257-512 513-1024 1025-20482049-40964097-8192 8193-16384 16385-3276832769-65536 Distinct Crash Errors Range of Program Sizes Tested, in Tokens Figure 4.Number of distinct crash errors found in 24 hours of testing with Csmith-generated programs in a given size range can only report the rate of errors, and not the number of bugs causing them, because we do not know how to automatically map failing tests back to the bugs that cause them. These graphs also indicate the number of wrong-code bugs that were fixed in response to our bug reports.
3.3    Bug-Finding Performance as a Function of Test-Case Size There are many ways in which a random test-case generator might be  “tuned”  for  particular  goals,  e.g.,  to  focus  on  certain  kinds of compiler defects. We performed an experiment to answer this question: given the goal of finding many defects quickly, should one configure Csmith to generate small programs or large ones? Other factors being equal, small test cases are preferable because they are closer to being reportable to compiler developers.
Using  the  same  compilers  and  optimization  options  that  we used for the experiments inSection3.2, we ran our testing process multiple times. For each run we selected a size range for test inputs, configured Csmith to generate programs in that range, 3 executed the test process for 24 hours, and counted the distinct crash errors found. We repeated this for various ranges of test-input sizes.
Figure 4  shows  that  the  rate  of  crash-error  detection  varies significantly as a function of the sizes of the test programs produced by Csmith. The greatest number of distinct crash errors is found by programs containing 8 K–16 K tokens: these programs averaged 81 KB before preprocessing. The confidence intervals are at 95% and were computed based on five repetitions.
We hypothesize that larger test cases expose more compiler errors for two reasons. First, throughput is increased because compiler start- up costs are better amortized. Second, the combinatorial explosion of feature interactions within a single large test case works in Csmith’s favor. The decrease in bug-finding power at the largest sizes appears to come from algorithms—in Csmith and in the compilers—that have superlinear running time.
3.4    Bug-Finding Performance Compared to Other Tools To evaluate Csmith’s ability to find bugs, we compared it to four other random program generators: the two versions of Randprog described inSection2 and two others described inSection5. We ran each generator in its default configuration on one of five identical 3 Although we can tune Csmith to prefer generating larger or smaller output, it lacks the ability to construct a test case of a specific size on demand. We ran this experiment by precomputing seeds to Csmith’s random-number generator that cause it to generate programs of the sizes we desired.
 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Cumulative Distinct Crash Errors Testing Time (Days) Csmith : 86 crashes Eide08 : 33 crashes Lindig07 : 20 crashes McKeeman98 : 9 crashes Turner05 : 14 crashes Figure 5.Comparison of the ability of five random program gener- ators to find distinct crash errors LineFunctionBranch CoverageCoverageCoverage make check-c75.13%82.23%46.26% make check-c & random75.58%82.41%47.11% GCC % change+0.45%+0.13%+0.85% absolute change+1,482+33+4,471 make test74.54%72.90%59.22% make test & random74.69%72.95%59.48% Clang % change+0.15%+0.05%+0.26% absolute change+655+74+926 Table 3.Augmenting the GCC and LLVM test suites with 10,000 randomly generated programs did not improve code coverage much and otherwise-idle machines, using one CPU on each host. Each generator repeatedly produced programs that we compiled and tested using the same compilers and optimization options that were used for the experiments inSection3.2.Figure5 plots the cumulative number of distinct crash errors found by these program generators during the one-week test. Csmith significantly outperforms the other tools.
3.5    Code Coverage Because we find many bugs, we hypothesized that randomly gener- ated programs exercise large parts of the compilers that were not cov- ered by existing test suites. To test this, we enabled code-coverage monitoring in GCC and LLVM. We then used each compiler to build its own test suite, and also to build its test suite plus 10,000 Csmith-generated programs.Table3 shows that the incremental coverage due to Csmith is so small as to be a negative result. Our best guess is that these metrics are too shallow to capture Csmith’s effects, and that we would generate useful additional coverage in terms of deeper metrics such as path or value coverage.
3.6    Where Are the Bugs?
Table4  characterizes  the  GCC  and  LLVM  bugs  we  found  by compiler part. Tables 5 and 6 show the ten buggiest files in LLVM and GCC as measured by our experiment inSection3.1. Most of the bugs we found in GCC were in the middle end: the machine- independent  optimizers.  LLVM  is  a  younger  compiler  and  our testing shook out some front-end and back-end bugs that would probably not be present in a more mature software base.
8 
GCCLLVM Front end010 Middle end4975 Back end1774 Unclassified1343 Total79202 Table  4.Distribution  of  bugs  across  compiler  stages.  A  bug  is unclassified either because it has not yet been fixed or the developer who fixed the bug did not indicate what files were changed.
Wrong- CodeCrash C File Name PurposeBugsBugs fold-constconstant folding36 combineinstruction combining15 tree-ssa-prepartial redundancy elim.04 tree-vrp variable range propagation04 tree-ssa-dcedead code elimination03 tree-ssa-reassocarithmetic expr. reassociation02 reload1register reloading11 tree-ssa-loop-loop iteration counting11 niter dsedead store elimination20 tree-scalar-scalar evolution20 evolution Other (15 files)n/a1924 Total (25 files)n/a2950 Table 5.Top ten buggy files in GCC Wrong- CodeCrash C++ File Name PurposeBugsBugs Instruction-mid-level instruction96 Combiningcombining SimpleRegister-register coalescing110 Coalescing DAGCombinerinstruction combining53 LoopUnswitch loop unswitching14 LICM loop invariant code motion05 LoopStrength- loop strength reduction13 Reduce FastISelfast instruction selection13 llvm-convertGCC-LLVM IR conversion04 ExprConstant constant folding22 JumpThreadingjump threading04 Other (72 files) n/a4692 Total (82 files)n/a66136 Table 6.Top ten buggy files in LLVM 3.7    Examples of Wrong-Code Bugs This section characterizes a few of the bugs that were revealed by miscompilation of programs generated by Csmith. These bugs fit into a simple model in which optimizations are structured like this: analysis if (safety check) { transformation } An  optimization  can  fail  to  be  semantics-preserving  if  the analysis is wrong, if the safety check is insufficiently conservative, or if the transformation is incorrect. The most common root cause for bugs that we found was an incorrect safety check.
GCC Bug #1: wrong safety check 4 Ifxis variable andc1and c2are  constants,  the  expression(x/c1)!=c2can  be  profitably rewritten  as(x-(c1*c2))>(c1-1),  using  unsigned  arithmetic to avoid problems with negative values. Prior to performing the transformation, expressions such asc1*c2and(c1*c2)+(c1-1) are checked for overflow. If overflow occurs, further simplifications can be made; for example,(x/1000000000)!=10always evaluates to0whenxis a 32-bit integer. GCC falsely detected overflow for some choices of constants. In the failure-inducing test case that we discovered,(x/-1)!=1was folded to0. This expression should evaluate to 1 for many values ofx, such as 0.
GCC Bug #2: wrong transformation 5 In C, if an argument of typeunsigned charis passed to a function with a parameter of typeint, the values seen inside the function should be in the range 0..255. We found a case in which a version of GCC inlined this kind of function call and then sign-extended the argument rather than zero-extending it, causing the function to see negative values of the parameter when the function was called with arguments in the range 128..255.
GCC Bug #3: wrong analysis 6 We found a bug that caused GCC to miscompile this code: 1static int g[1]; 2static int *p = &g[0]; 3static int *q = &g[0]; 4 5int foo (void) { 6g[0] = 1; 7*p = 0; 8*p = *q; 9return g[0]; 10} The generated code returned1instead of0. The problem oc- curred when the compiler failed to recognize thatpandqare aliases; this happened becauseqwas mistakenly identified as a read-only memory location, which is defined not to alias a mutable location.
The wrong not-alias fact caused the store in line 7 to be marked as dead so that a subsequent dead-store elimination pass removed it.
GCC Bug #4: wrong analysis 7 A version of GCC miscompiled this function: 1int x = 4; 2int y; 3 4void foo (void) { 5for (y = 1; y < 8; y += 7) { 6int *p = &y; 7*p = x; 8} 9} Whenfooreturns,yshould be11. A loop-optimization pass determined that a temporary variable representing*pwas invariant with valuex+7and hoisted it in front of the loop, while retaining a dataflow fact indicating thatx+7 == y+7, a relationship that no longer held after code  motion. This incorrect fact  lead  GCC to generate code leaving 8 iny, instead of 11.
4 http://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=42721 5 http://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=43438 6 http://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=42952 7 http://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=43360 9 
LLVM Bug #1: wrong safety check 8 (x==c1)||(x<c2)can be simplified  tox < c2whenc1andc2are  constants  andc1<c2.
An LLVM version incorrectly transformed(x==0)||(x<-3)to x < -3. LLVM did a comparison between0and−3in the safety check for this optimization, but performed an unsigned comparison rather than a signed one, leading it to incorrectly determine that the transformation was safe.
LLVM Bug #2: wrong safety check 9 (x|c1)==c2evaluates to0 ifc1andc2are constants and(c1& ̃c2)!=0. In other words, if any bit that is set inc1is unset inc2, the original expression cannot be true. A version of LLVM contained a logic error in the safety check for this optimization, wrongly replacing this kind of expression with 0 even whenc1was not a constant.
LLVM Bug #3: wrong safety check 10 “Narrowing” is a strength- reduction optimization that can be applied to loads when only part of an object is needed, or to stores where only part of an object is modified. For example, at the level of the abstract machine this code loads and stores anunsigned int: 1unsigned y; 2 3void bar (void) { 4y |= 255; 5} Optimizing compilers for x86 may translatebarinto the following code, which loads nothing and stores a single byte: bar: movb $-1, y ret We  found  a  case  in  which  LLVM  attempted  to  perform  an analogous narrowing operation, but a logic error caused the safety check to succeed even when a different store modified the object prior to the store that was the target of the narrowing transformation.
LLVM Bug #4: wrong analysis 11 This code should print “5”: 1void foo (void) { 2int x; 3for (x = 0; x < 5; x++) { 4if (x) continue; 5if (x) break; 6} 7printf("%d", x); 8} LLVM’s scalar evolution analysis computes properties of loop induction variables, including the maximum number of iterations.
Line 5 of the program above caused this analysis to mistakenly conclude thatxwas 1 after the loop executed.
4.    Discussion Are we finding bugs that matter?One might suspect that random testing  finds  bugs  that  do  not  matter  in  practice.  Undoubtedly this  happens  sometimes,  but  in  a  number  of  instances  we  have direct confirmation that Csmith is finding bugs that matter, because bugs that we have found and reported have been independently rediscovered and re-reported by application developers. By a very conservative  estimate—counting  only  the  times  that  a  compiler 8 http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=2844 9 http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=7750 10 http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=7833 11 http://llvm.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=7845 developer explicitly labeled a wrong-code bug report as a duplicate of one of ours—this has happened eight times: four times for GCC and four for LLVM. We also have indirect confirmation that our bugs matter. The developers of open-source compilers fixed almost all of the bugs that we reported, and the GCC development team marked 25 of our bugs as P1: the maximum, release-blocking priority.
Creating reportable bugsReporting compiler crash bugs is easy, but reporting wrong-code bugs is harder. Compiler developers will (rightfully) ignore a wrong-code bug report that is based on a large random program. Rather, a bug report must be accompanied by com- pelling evidence that a bug exists; in most cases the best evidence is a small test case that is obviously miscompiled. Delta debug- ging [31] automates test-case reduction, but all existing variants that are intended for reducing C programs—such as hierarchical delta debugging [18] and Wilkerson’s implementation [29]—introduce undefined behavior. The resulting programs are small but useless.
To avoid undefined behavior during reduction, we rely on compiler warnings, dynamic checkers, and manual test-case reduction. There is substantial room for improvement.
The relationship between testing and verificationAs our Comp- Cert results make plain, verification does not obviate testing, but rather complements it. Testing can provide end-to-end evidence that numerous paths through a system work properly. Verification, on the other hand, typically focuses on a narrow slice of a stack of tools, and the parts outside the slice remain in the trusted computing base.
There does not yet appear to be a nuanced understanding of the kinds of testing, and the amount of testing effort, that are rendered unnecessary by artifacts like CompCert [14] and seL4 [12].
Toward realistic, correct compilers Compilers must support rapid development to cope with new optimizations, new source languages, and  new  target  architectures.  Generated  code  often  needs  to  be resource-efficient to support application developers’ goals. Finally, compilers should generate correct code. Meeting even two of these goals is challenging, and it is not clear how to meet all three in a single tool. There seem to be four paths forward.
Compiler  verification.Although  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  a verified compiler for C++0x, due to the immense complexity of the draft standard, CompCert is an existence proof that a verified, optimizing C compiler is within reach. However, the burden of verification is significant. CompCert still lacks a number of useful C  features  and  few  mainstream  compiler  developers  have  the formal  verification  skills  that  are  needed  to  add  new  language features and optimization passes. On the other hand, projects such as XCERT [26] may dramatically lower the bar for working on verified compilation.
Compiler simplicity.For non-bottleneck applications, compiler optimization adds little end-user value. It would seem possible to take a simple compiler such as TCC [2], which does not optimize across statement boundaries, and validate it through code inspec- tions, heavy use, and other techniques. At present, however, TCC is much buggier than more heavily-used compilers such as GCC and LLVM.
Compiler  testing.We  hypothesize  that  it  is  possible  to  gain high confidence in a complex compiler like GCC by choosing a fixed configuration, disabling optimization passes whose effects are significantly non-local, and performing “just enough testing.” A test plan would be sufficient if all code paths through the compiler that are used to compile an application of interest had been tested.
Clearly, a sophisticated way to abstract over paths is needed.
Equivalence  checking.If  equivalence  checkers  for  machine code [7] could scale to large programs, verified compilers would be  largely  unnecessary  because  one  compiler’s  output  could  be proved equivalent to another’s. Although these tools are not likely to scale up to multi-megabyte applications anytime soon, it should 10 
be possible to automatically partition applications into smaller parts so that equivalence checking can be done piecewise.
Future workAugmenting Csmith with white-box testing tech- niques, where the structure of the tested system is taken into account in a first-class way, would be productive. This will be difficult for several reasons. First, we anticipate substantial challenges in inte- grating the necessary constraint-solving machinery with Csmith’s existing logic for generating valid C programs. It is possible that we will need to start over, next time engineering a version of Csmith in which all constraints are explicit and declarative, rather than being buried in a small mountain of C++. Second, the inverse problems that must be solved to generate an input become prohibitively dif- ficult when inputs pass through a parser, particularly if the parser contains hash tables. Godefroid et al. [8] showed a way to solve this problem by integrating a constraint solver with a grammar for the language being generated. However, due to its non-local pointer and effect analyses, the validity decision problem for programs in the subset of C that Csmith generates is far harder than the question of whether a program can be generated by the JavaScript grammar used by Godefroid et al.
5.    Related Work Compilers have been tested using randomized methods for nearly 50 years. Boujarwah and Saleh [4] gave a good survey in 1997.
In 1962, Sauder [22] tested the correctness of COBOL compilers by placing random variables in programs’ data sections. In 1970, Hanford [10] used a PL/1 grammar to drive the generation of random programs.  The  grammar  was  extensible  and  was  augmented  by “syntax generators” that could be used, for example, to ensure that variables were declared before being used. In 1972, Purdom [21] used a syntax-directed method to generate test sentences for a parser.
He gave an efficient algorithm for generating short sentences from a context-free grammar such that each production of the grammar was used at least once, and he tested LR(1) parsers using this technique.
Burgess and Saidi [5] designed an automatic generator of test cases for FORTRAN compilers. The tests were designed to be self- checking and to contain features that optimizing compilers were known to exploit. In order to predict test cases’ results, the code generator restricted assignment statements to be executed only once during the execution of the sub-program or main program. These tests found four bugs in two FORTRAN 77 compilers.
In 1998, McKeeman [16] coined the term “differential testing.” His work resulted in DDT, a family of program generators that conform to the C standard at various levels, from level 1 (random characters) to level 7 (generated code is “model conforming,” incor- porating some high-level structure). DDT is more expressive than Csmith (DDT is capable of generating all legal C programs) and it was used to find numerous bugs in C compilers. To our knowledge, McKeeman’s paper contains the first acknowledgment that it is im- portant to avoid undefined behavior in generated C programs used for compiler testing. However, DDT avoided only a small subset of all undefined behaviors, and only then during test-case reduc- tion, not during normal testing. Thus, it is not a suitable basis for automatic bug-finding.
Lindig [15] used randomly generated C programs to find several compiler bugs related to calling conventions. His tool, called Quest, was specially targeted: rather than generating code with control flow and arithmetic, Quest generates code that creates complex data structures, loads them with constant values, and passes them to a function where assertions check the received values. Because its tests are self-checking, Quest is not based on differential testing.
Self-checking tests are convenient, but the drawback is that Quest is far less expressive than Csmith. Lindig used Quest to test GCC, LCC, ICC, and a few other compilers and found 13 bugs.
Sheridan  [23]  also  used  a  random  generator  to  find  bugs  in C  compilers.  A  script  rotated  through  a  list  of  constants  of  the principal  arithmetic  types,  producing  a  source  file  that  applied various operators to pairs of constants. This tool found two bugs in GCC, one bug in SUSE Linux’s version of GCC, and five bugs in CodeSourcery’s version of GCC for ARM. Sheridan’s tool produces self-checking tests. However, it is less expressive than Csmith and it fails to avoid undefined behavior such as signed overflow.
Zhao et al. [32] created an automated program generator for testing an embedded C++ compiler. Their tool allows a general test requirement, such as which optimization to test, to be specified in a script. The generator constructs a program template based on the test requirement and uses it to drive further code generation. Zhao et al.
used GCC as the reference to check the compiler under test. They reported greatly improved statement coverage in the tested modules and found several new compiler bugs.
6.    Conclusion Using randomized differential testing, we found and reported hun- dreds of previously unknown bugs in widely used C compilers, both commercial and open source. Many of the bugs we found cause a compiler to emit incorrect code without any warning. Most of our re- ported defects have been fixed, meaning that compiler implementers found them important enough to track down, and 25 of the bugs we reported against GCC were classified as release-blocking. All of this evidence suggests that there is substantial room for improvement in the state of the art for compiler quality assurance.
To create a random program generator with high bug-finding power, the key problem we solved was the expressive generation of C programs that are free of undefined behavior and independent of unspecified behavior. Csmith, our program generator, uses both static analysis and dynamic checks to avoid these hazards.
The return on investment from random testing is good. Our rough estimate—including faculty, staff, and student salaries, machines purchased, and university overhead—is that each of the more than 325 bugs we reported cost less than $1,000 to find. The incremental cost of a new bug that we find today is much lower.
SoftwareCsmith is open source and available for download at http://embed.cs.utah.edu/csmith/.
Acknowledgments The  authors  would  like  to  thank  Bruce  Childers,  David  Coppit, Chucky Ellison, Robby Findler, David Gay, Casey Klein, Gerwin Klein, Chris Lattner, Sorin Lerner, Xavier Leroy, Bill McKeeman, Diego Novillo, Alastair Reid, Julian Seward, Zach Tatlock, our shepherd Atanas Rountev, and the anonymous reviewers for their invaluable feedback on drafts of this paper. We also thank Hans Boehm, Xavier Leroy, Michael Norrish, Bryan Turner, and the GCC and  LLVM  development  teams  for  their  technical  assistance  in various aspects of our work.
This  research  was  primarily  supported  by  an  award  from DARPA’s Computer Science Study Group.
References [1]ACE Associated Computer Experts. SuperTest C/C++ compiler test and validation suite.http://www.ace.nl/compiler/supertest.
html.
[2]F. Bellard.   TCC: Tiny C compiler, ver. 0.9.25, May 2009.http: //bellard.org/tcc/.
[3]C. L. Biffle. Undefined behavior in Google NaCl, Jan. 2010.http:// code.google.com/p/nativeclient/issues/detail?id=245.
11 
[4]A. S. Boujarwah and K. Saleh. Compiler test case generation methods: a  survey  and  assessment.Information  and  Software  Technology, 39(9):617–625, 1997.
[5]C. J. Burgess and M. Saidi. The automatic generation of test cases for optimizing Fortran compilers.Information and Software Technology, 38(2):111–119, 1996.
[6]E. Eide and J. Regehr. Volatiles are miscompiled, and what to do about it. InProc. EMSOFT, pages 255–264, Oct. 2008.
[7] X. Feng and A. J. Hu. Cutpoints for formal equivalence verification of embedded software. InProc. EMSOFT, pages 307–316, Sept. 2005.
[8] P. Godefroid, A. Kie  ̇ zun, and M. Y. Levin. Grammar-based whitebox fuzzing. InProc. PLDI, pages 206–215, June 2008.
[9]R. Hamlet. Random testing. In J. Marciniak, editor,Encyclopedia of Software Engineering. Wiley, second edition, 2001.
[10]K. V. Hanford.   Automatic generation of test cases.IBM Systems Journal, 9(4):242–257, Dec. 1970.
[11]International Organization for Standardization.ISO/IEC 9899:TC2: Programming Languages—C, May 2005.http://www.open-std.
org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n1124.pdf.
[12]G. Klein et al.  seL4: Formal verification of an OS kernel.  InProc.
SOSP, pages 207–220, Oct. 2009.
[13]J. C. Knight and N. G. Leveson.  An experimental evaluation of the assumption of independence in multiversion programming.IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 12(1):96–109, Jan. 1986.
[14]  X. Leroy. Formal verification of a realistic compiler.Commun. ACM, 52(7):107–115, July 2009.
[15] C.  Lindig.Random  testing  of  C  calling  conventions.InProc.
AADEBUG, pages 3–12, Sept. 2005.
[16] W. M. McKeeman. Differential testing for software.Digital Technical Journal, 10(1):100–107, Dec. 1998.
[17]B. P. Miller, L. Fredriksen, and B. So.   An empirical study of the reliability  of  UNIX  utilities.Commun.  ACM,  33(12):32–44,  Dec.
1990.
[18]G. Misherghi and Z. Su. HDD: Hierarchical delta debugging. InProc.
ICSE, pages 142–151, May 2006.
[19]Perennial, Inc. ACVS ANSI/ISO/FIPS-160 C validation suite, ver. 4.5, Jan. 1998.http://www.peren.com/pages/acvs_set.htm.
[20]Plum  Hall,  Inc.The  Plum  Hall  validation  suite  for  C.http: //www.plumhall.com/stec.html.
[21]P. Purdom. A sentence generator for testing parsers.BIT Numerical Mathematics, 12(3):366–375, 1972.
[22] R. L. Sauder.  A general test data generator for COBOL.  InAFIPS Joint Computer Conferences, pages 317–323, May 1962.
[23]F. Sheridan. Practical testing of a C99 compiler using output compar- ison.Software—Practice and Experience, 37(14):1475–1488, Nov.
2007.
[24]J. Souyris, V. Wiels, D. Delmas, and H. Delseny. Formal verification of avionics software products. InProc. FM, pages 532–546, Nov. 2009.
[25]S. Summit. comp.lang.c frequently asked questions.http://c-faq.
com/.
[26]Z. Tatlock and S. Lerner. Bringing extensibility to verified compilers.
InProc. PLDI, pages 111–121, June 2010.
[27]B. Turner.  Random Program Generator, Jan. 2007.http://sites.
google.com/site/brturn2/randomcprogramgenerator.
[28]B. White et al. An integrated experimental environment for distributed systems and networks. InProc. OSDI, pages 255–270, Dec. 2002.
[29] D. S. Wilkerson. Delta ver. 2006.08.03, Aug. 2006.http://delta.
tigris.org/.
[30]M. Wolfe. How compilers and tools differ for embedded systems. In Proc. CASES, Sept. 2005.  Keynote address.http://www.pgroup.
com/lit/articles/pgi_article_cases.pdf.
[31] A.  Zeller  and  R.  Hildebrandt.    Simplifying  and  isolating  failure- inducing input.IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 28(2):183–200, Feb. 2002.
[32]C. Zhao et al.  Automated test program generation for an industrial optimizing  compiler.   InProc.  ICSE  Workshop  on  Automation  of Software Test, pages 36–43, May 2009.
12