Learn about upcoming changes to Gmailify & POP in Gmail - Gmail Help  

 [Skip to main content](#search-form)

[](/?tab=uu)

[Gmail Help](/mail)

[](https://www.google.com/intl/en/about/products?tab=uh)

[Sign in](https://accounts.google.com/ServiceLogin?hl=en&passive=true&continue=http://support.google.com/mail/answer/16604719%3Fhl%3Den&ec=GAZAdQ)

[](/?tab=uu)

[Google Help](/)

[*   Help Center](/mail/?hl=en)[*   Community](/mail/community?hl=en&help_center_link=CK-89QcSO0xlYXJuIGFib3V0IHVwY29taW5nIGNoYW5nZXMgdG8gR21haWxpZnkgJmFtcDsgUE9QIGluIEdtYWls)[*   Gmail](//mail.google.com/?hl=en)

[*   Privacy Policy](//www.google.com/intl/en/privacy.html)[*   Terms of Service](//www.google.com/intl/en/policies/terms/)*   Submit feedback

Send feedback on...

This help content & information

General Help Center experience

Next

*   [Help Center](/mail/?hl=en)
*   [Community](/mail/community?hl=en&help_center_link=CK-89QcSO0xlYXJuIGFib3V0IHVwY29taW5nIGNoYW5nZXMgdG8gR21haWxpZnkgJmFtcDsgUE9QIGluIEdtYWls)

[Gmail](//mail.google.com/?hl=en)

*   [Import & forward emails](/mail/topic/7280290?hl=en&ref_topic=3394150)
*   [Learn about upcoming changes to Gmailify & POP in Gmail](/mail/answer/16604719)

# Learn about upcoming changes to Gmailify & POP in Gmail

Starting January 2026, Gmail will no longer provide support for the following:

*   **Gmailify:** This feature allows you to get special features like spam protection or inbox organization applied to your third-party email account. [Learn more about Gmailify](/mail/answer/6304825).
*   **POP:** This feature allows you to read your messages from a third-party account in Gmail. Unlike IMAP connections, POP only works with a single device and doesn’t sync your email in real time. Instead, emails are downloaded, and you decide how often you want to download new emails. As an alternative, you can still link your third-party accounts in the Gmail app.

These changes help provide the most secure and current options to access your messages in Gmail.

## Learn about changes to Gmailify

You won’t be able to get specific features in Gmail applied to your third-party account, like:

*   [Spam protection](https://safety.google/intl/en_us/gmail/)
*   Better email notifications on mobile
*   [Inbox categories](/mail/answer/3094499)
*   Faster search with [advanced search operators](/mail/answer/7190)

### What you need to do

*   You can still read and send emails from your other account within the Gmail app. This uses a standard IMAP connection, which is supported in the Gmail mobile app.
*   [Learn how to add another email account to the Gmail app](/mail/answer/6078445).

## Learn about changes to POP connections

*   Gmail will no longer support checking emails from third-party accounts through POP.
*   The option to "Check mail from other accounts" will no longer be available in Gmail on your computer.

### What you need to do

**Important:** If you have a work or school account, your administrator can help migrate your email data into Google Workspace. [Learn more about the data migration service](/a/topic/14012345).

*   To continue to receive messages from your other account in Gmail, you need to set up IMAP access.
    *   Check your email provider’s documentation for instructions on how to enable IMAP for your account.
*   To read your messages from your other account, use the Gmail app. [Learn how to add another email account to the Gmail app](/mail/answer/6078445).

## Frequently asked questions

Will I lose the emails I already imported?

No. All messages synced before the deprecation stay in Gmail.

Can I still use other email accounts in the Gmail app?

Yes. For third-party accounts like Yahoo! and Outlook, you can add them to the Gmail mobile app on Android and iPhone and iPad.

## Related resources

*   [Get Gmail features for your other email accounts](/mail/answer/6304825)
*   [Add another email account on your computer](/mail/answer/21289)

## Need more help?

### Try these next steps:

[

Post to the help community Get answers from community members

](/mail/community?hl=en&help_center_link=CK-89QcSO0xlYXJuIGFib3V0IHVwY29taW5nIGNoYW5nZXMgdG8gR21haWxpZnkgJmFtcDsgUE9QIGluIEdtYWls)

true

## [Import & forward emails](/mail/topic/7280290?hl=en&ref_topic=3394150)

*   1 of 7
    
    [Email clients (POP/IMAP)](/mail/topic/7280141?hl=en&ref_topic=7280290)
*   2 of 7
    
    [Add another email account on your computer](/mail/answer/21289?hl=en&ref_topic=7280290)
*   3 of 7
    
    [Automatically forward Gmail messages to another account](/mail/answer/10957?hl=en&ref_topic=7280290)
*   4 of 7
    
    [Best practices for forwarding email to Gmail](/mail/answer/175365?hl=en&ref_topic=7280290)
*   5 of 7
    
    [Download & send emails as attachments](/mail/answer/9261412?hl=en&ref_topic=7280290)
*   6 of 7
    
    [Add an Outlook account to Gmail](/mail/answer/15588592?hl=en&ref_topic=7280290)
*   7 of 7
    
    [Learn about upcoming changes to Gmailify & POP in Gmail](#)

*   ©2025 Google
*   [Privacy Policy](//www.google.com/intl/en/privacy.html)
*   [Terms of Service](//www.google.com/intl/en/policies/terms/)
*   [Program Policies](https://www.google.com/gmail/about/policy)

Language català‎dansk‎Deutsch‎eesti‎English (United Kingdom)‎español‎español (Latinoamérica)‎Filipino‎français‎hrvatski‎Indonesia‎italiano‎latviešu‎lietuvių‎magyar‎Melayu‎Nederlands‎norsk‎polski‎português‎português (Brasil)‎română‎slovenčina‎slovenščina‎suomi‎svenska‎Tiếng Việt‎Türkçe‎čeština‎Ελληνικά‎български‎русский‎српски‎українська‎‏עברית‏العربية‏فارسیमराठी‎हिन्दी‎தமிழ்‎తెలుగు‎ไทย‎中文（简体）‎中文（繁體）‎日本語‎한국어‎ English‎

Enable Dark Mode

Send feedback on...

This help content & information General Help Center experience

Search

Clear search

Close search

Google apps

Main menu

 

7655864667506114436

        

true

    

Search Help Center

false

true

true

true

       

true

true

17

          

false

false

        

false

        

false