Why I Keep Blogging With Emacs          

# [Entropic Thoughts](/)

## Why I Keep Blogging With Emacs

*   [Home](/)
*   [Archive](/archive)
*   [Tags](/tags)
*   [About](/about)
*   [xkqr.org](https://xkqr.org/)

# Why I Keep Blogging With Emacs

by

kqr

, scheduled 2025-10-02

Tags:

*   [meta](tags.html#meta)
*   [emacs](tags.html#emacs)

Every time I look at someone’s simple static site generation setup for their blog, I feel a pang of envy. I’m sure I could make a decent blogging engine in 2,000 lines of code, and it would be something I’d understand, be proud over, able to extend, and willing to share with others.

Instead, I write these articles in Org mode, and use mostly the standard Org publishing functions to export them to html. This is [sometimes brittle](long-hiatus-emacs-upgrades.html), but most annoyingly, I don’t understand it. I have been asked for details on how my publishing flow works, but the truth is I have no idea what happens when I run the `org-publish-current-file` command.

I could find out by tracing the evaluation of the Lisp code that runs on export, but I won’t, because just the html exporting code (`ox-html.el`) is 5,000 lines of complexity. The general exporting framework (`ox-publish.el` and `ox.el`) is 8,000 lines. The framework depends on Org parsing code (`org-element.el`) which is at least another 9,000 lines. This is over 20,000 lines of complexity I’d need to contend with.

It might seem like a no-brainer to just write that 2,000 line custom static generator and use that instead.

* * *

Except one thing: Babel.

Any lightweight markup format (like Markdown or ReStructuredText or whatever) allows for embedding code blocks, but Org, through Babel, can _run_ that code on export, and then display the output in the published document, _even when the output is a table or an image_. It supports sessions that lets code reuse definitions from earlier code blocks. It allows for injecting variables from the markup into the code, and vice versa. As a bonus, Org doesn’t require a JavaScript syntax highlighter, because it generates inline styles in the source code.

It does this for a large number of languages, although I mainly use it with R for drawing plots. Being able to do this is incredibly convenient, because it makes it trivial to [draft data, illustrations, and text at the same time](intention-to-treat-experiments.html), adjusting both until the article coheres. Having tried it, I cannot see myself living without it.

* * *

A simple 2,000 line blogging engine would be a fun weekend project. Mirroring the features of Babel I use would turn it into a multi-month endeavour for someone with limited time such as myself. Not going to happen, and I will continue to beat myself up for overcomplicating my publishing workflow.

If you liked this and want more you should [buy me a coffee](https://buymeacoff.ee/kqr). That helps me turn my 110+ ideas backlog into articles.

Shoutout to my amazing wife   without whose support I would never make it past the first sentence. ♥

S = k log W.  
   
Comments? [Send me an email](/about).  
You can also [subscribe for updates](https://buttondown.email/entropicthoughts).