Memorizing phone numbers | Phong's blog                           

[

# Phong's blog

](/)

[Home](/) [Blog](/blog/)

# Memorizing phone numbers

_2025 Oct 04._

I don’t save anyone’s phone number in my contacts, except for my mom’s two phone numbers, but I save them as the numbers themselves instead of names or something.  
The reason for this is so that when I turn on "Do Not Disturb" it won’t filter out any calls from my mom.  Other than that, I’m usually the one who initiates contact, or I’ll get back to someone when I see a message or a missed call from a number I recognize.

Why do I do this? 

It’s just a natural way that I’ve found works for me. 

Not saving numbers means I see the actual number more often, so my brain gets exposed to it repeatedly whenever I open my messages or check past conversations.  I’ve realized that this makes it easier for me to memorize the numbers naturally.

 Here’s the algorithm I use:

*   If I start remembering someone’s number, it means the person I’m texting is gradually becoming closer and more important to me.
*   If I used to remember their number but I start forgetting it, it means a relationship that was once close is now fading. Sometimes, this even serves as a reminder, like “It seems I haven’t messaged Mom in a while. I’m a bit slow recalling her number”(since my mom has two numbers, this method actually works quite well.)
*   If I don’t remember their number, it’s just a fleeting connection, a temporary contact. Sometimes, it makes sense not to save it. Most of the time, if needed, I can always look it up or find a way to contact them easy.

Why bother memorizing phone numbers?

 It’s actually a natural thing that many parents in my country used to teach their children, so they could stay safe if they ever got lost. Of course, there are national emergency contact systems, but in some situations, knowing parent's phone numbers is much better. 

I’ve seen this less, not just with kids but also adults, almost nobody remembers any phone numbers now, not even those of their closest loved ones. Some of my friends even surprised me when I realized they didn’t remember their own number. 

With the convenience of technology, the constant presence of smartphones, smartwatches, and soon even smart glasses, memorizing numbers (and more) just seems unnecessary. 

Sometimes, this makes me pause and reflect. 

That’s also why I like my way. It feels natural, and it used to be a basic thing. Sometimes, it even makes people whose numbers I remember feel happy when they find out. I can see it in their eyes. Sometimes they feel reassured, sometimes they find it interesting. Just imagine that your phone number, memorized by someone, by someone important to you. It gives you a strange sense of comfort.

There was a friend I knew, I drove her home, but her phone was still in my car, and I didn’t know it. Later, I got a call, picked up, and it was her. I got worried, but she said she’d borrowed the building guard’s phone to call me. She said something like, “I realized I left my phone with you, but somehow, I naturally remembered your number. Strangely, I can hardly remember anyone else’s number, but I remember yours.”  
I used to remember her number too, but now I’m starting to forget it, it’s been a long time since we’ve met or talked. A once-deep relationship gradually fades, just like a phone number fading from my memory.

It’s a way for me to exercise my brain’s memory more instead of relying on something.  
We have been, are, and will be entering an era where technology and artificial intelligence will wipe out many of the most basic, natural things until we forget that these little things ever existed.  
Is this supposed to be an upgrade for us? Or are we the ones being replaced, little by little, until the moment we realize it?  
Looking at it more broadly, reflecting on many other things. If you found yourself in a situation without any technology around, would you be afraid?  
Would you be able to protect yourself or those you love?

I asked myself like that and found more interesting things that I forgot it ever existed.

Hữu Phong.

[#journal](/blog/?q=journal)

   54

Powered by [Bear ʕ•ᴥ•ʔ](https://bearblog.dev)