Git, JSON and Markdown walk into bar | Grumpy Gamer         

[Home](/)

[Contact](/contact)

[Archives](/archives)

[About](/about)

[RSS](/rss)

[Mastodon](https://mastodon.gamedev.place/@grumpygamer)

# Grumpy Gamer

### Ye Olde Grumpy Gamer Blog. Est. 2004

[Git, JSON and Markdown walk into bar](/git_json_markdown/)

Oct 5, 2025

I want to talk about three things that has fundamentally changed my dev-life. There are a lot of things, like ImGUI, that are very amazing and useful but they don’t provide a general solution across many problems.

In no particular order…

## Git

I’ve been using Git since 2010 and it really has changed my dev-life. I’d used version control before that, mainly Perform, SVN and PVSC, but Git felt nice and unobtrusive and I like that everything was local until I pushed to the server.

It’s both nice and annoying that you can’t lock files (like art). You can (kind of) with LFS but that feels tacked on and not ready for primetime. Don’t think so? Try explaining installing and using it to a non-technical artist sometime.

Git can be frustrating if you’re trying to do anything but the basics.

Accidentally check in a secret file months ago and need to scrub it? Good luck with that. There are ways but it requires a lot of Git-Fu.

I mainly use a GUI for git ([Fork](https://git-fork.com/)) and that takes most of the pain away. I do use the command line, but mostly in automation scripts.

## Markdown

Before Markdown became the de-facto standard, I used my own custom format. It worked but wasn’t great and only I understood it.

Markdown has it’s issues when you start using the more esoteric features. I’m also annoyed at bold and italics notation. Why is italics `*italics*` and bold is `**bold**`? Why not `*bold*` and `_italics_`. That would make a lot more sense to me.

I also have issue with it’s creator, John Gruber. He is a highly annoying smug Apple Fanboy. His writing was fine in the early days when Apple was #3, but got intolerable as Apple became the 800lb gorilla. It’s changed recently as Apple has snubbed him but I still can’t read anything he writes.

But, I like his Markdown.

## JSON

I use JSON for just about every data file format in my games. JSON was created by Douglas Crockford as a notation for Javascript objects.

I worked with Doug Crockford at Lucasfilm for several years. I always had a lot of respect for Doug and was somewhat intimidated (in a good way) by him. Doug was also the producer for the Nintendo Maniac Mansion.

As much as I love JSON, there are some things about it that annoy me. I dislike that trailing commas are not allowed

```
"name": [
	"value1",
	"value2",  <- Opps
]
```

There is no need for this and it makes writing out valid JSON more complex. I also don’t like you that have to wrap keys names in quotes if they are simple ascii.

```
name: "value"  <- Opps
```

I wrote a custom JSON parser I use in all my games that relaxes these, but then general JSON readers fail on my data.

* * *

### Comments:

Leak 3d ago

One other important thing JSON left out was comments, but at least there's JSONC for that...

dusoft 3d ago

I agree with your comment re Markdown and the strong vs italics. It is illogical.

ridcully 3d ago

Why not \*bold\*, \_underline\_, and /italics/

Pouf 3d ago

One thing I hate about JSON is that there is no comments.

Ron Gilbert ✔ 3d ago

Comments are hard if you want to read and then write the JSON. What do you do with the comments? They can be ignored on read, but won't be preserved on write. My game engine is constantly reading and writing JSON.

ridcully 3d ago

And for JSON, there is JSON5 (the JSON for humans... so cute...), which  
addresses many of the annoyances mentioned already (trailing comma,  
comments) and more (multi-line strings, ...)  

Ron Gilbert ✔ 3d ago

Yes, I understand they are a lot of JSON readers (including mine) that address these issues, but the standard doesn't so any custom JSON will break most readers. The GUI tools on the Mac for reading JSON don't read non-standard JSON. And no, I'm not asking for alternatives, I was making a point and the standard.

MM 3d ago

+1 to -> Why not \*bold\*, \_underline\_, and /italics/

benzado 3d ago

100% agree with all of this, including your feelings about John Gruber

fds 3d ago

It took an entire decade after JSON's invention that a version of Internet Explorer would finally allow leaving trailing commas in object literals inside JavaScript code.

Torsten Bronger 3d ago

In IT, things must be able to evolve. But there will never be a JSON 2. In addition to what you mentioned, I miss a decent floating point concept in JSON for my smart home (powers, temperatures).

Stan 3d ago

Sadly, some stuff are made by g33ks for g33ks only with no consideration for user experience: vim, docker, git,... (Not everyone of them on same insane level)

Screwtapello 3d ago

The Markdown formatting thing is actually more complex. \_italics\_ works like \*italics\*, and \_\_bold\_\_ works like \*\*bold\*\*.  
  
The reason is that nothing is invented in a vaccuum, and before HTML came along most digital communication platform supported one level of emphasis at best - computers could print text in a brighter colour to make bold, and typewriters could underline. So different communities had different conventions for expressing that one level of emphasis: \*bold\* and \_underline\_.  
  
But HTML4 has \*two\* levels of emphasis, bold and italic. As a convenience, both conventions for level-1 emphasis got mapped to HTML's level-1 emphasis formatting (italic), and they were each extended to support level-2 emphasis as well.  
  
That said, Markdown is really a shorthand for HTML, and if you choose different abbreviations that suit your taste better, it doesn't really matter - it all becomes HTML in the end.

Kris Kowal 3d ago

My understanding is that Chip and Randy were also inventors on JSON in whatever capacity. Chip wrote the first implementations. Doug definitely sold it, though. Front man Carl Hollywood thru and thru

Edu G 3d ago

Have you tried YAML? I'd rather use it over JSON anytime

Tale 3d ago

Yeah, Git is pretty awesome! BTW, removing rogue files from a Git repo indeed is somewhat painful, but using filter-branch it is doable. This does change all the commit hashes though...

Encelo 3d ago

Have you tried TOML and AsciiDoc?

Maia 2d ago

Lack of trailing commas is particularly annoying. I wish it was better supported. I always support them myself, but as you say there’s many tools that don’t.

Giulio 2d ago

What's the issue with the lack of trailing comma? I'm kind of neutral to it TBH. It helps a little in a diff, since it doesn't highlight the line that has been changed just to add a comma, but it's hardly a big annoyance. Perhaps I'm missing something?

Neil Roberts 2d ago

I was wondering what a boolb was until I realised that 800lb is not l33t speak 😆

pieq 1d ago

I like Git because I've spent the last 10 years painfully learning it (and I'm still nowhere near git-fu levels). I recently had a chat with a guy who maintains Mercurial, and I realized that Git Vs. Mercurial is probably like the VHS Vs. Betamax battle back in the day: the latter is better, but eventually it's the former that took over. It's very hard to have a good mental picture of the Git model, and it's very hard to teach it. People have to go through the painful experience of using it until one day, maybe, it clicks.  
  
Markdown is nice for simple texts, and anyway it's just a little wrapper around HTML so you can always go crazy and write HTML when needed. I've also used reStructuredText for some projects, and even though I despise its syntax, it comes with a lot of great stuff to generate more complex documentation (table of contents in Markdown, anyone?). Since I have to go back and forth between the two, I always needs some kind of cheat sheets to remember the syntax, not to mention that Markdown has now many different flavors with different level of support (if you want footnotes, etc.).  
  
And finally, I agree with the general sentiment about JSON here. The lack of support for trailing commas is a pain in the butt, especially as a Python developer because this is a given there, and as many pointed out, the lack of support for comments is SO frustrating! At work, we use a mix of JSON and YAML depending on the need. I still don't fully understand the YAML syntax (especially that | thing with multi-line statements), but I guess I need to come to peace with all these crazy "de facto standards".  
  

Nandush 1d ago

I love lazygit for git!

### Add comment:

Name 

Brief Message

 Comment

Unless otherwise noted, all content is Copyright 2004-2025 Ron Gilbert. Unauthorized use under penalty of death by dismemberment and/or fine not less than one million dollars. Use of content of grumpygamer.com to train AI is expressly forbidden without written approval from a human (me) (v5.0)