# Love C, Hate C: Web Framework Memory Problems

I love C. I could give you rational reasons for that. Like the fact that it works everywhere and how it goes fast. But mostly I love C because when I write C I feel an intimate connection with my computer. To me, C has soul. In fact all my personal project are written in C, like the graphics rendering engines that I'm currently writing. The problem is that C is dangerous and sharing new C projects to wider audiences is borderline malicious.

Today on hacker news a cool little [web framework written in C](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=45526890) was posted. As a security researcher I'm always trying to sharpen my skills so I thought I'd given the app a look. And yup sure enough, there's memory safety issues.

```c
HttpParser parseRequest(char *request) {
    HttpParser parser = {
        .isValid = true,
        .requestBuffer = strdup(request), // [0]
        .requestLength = strlen(request),
        .position = 0,
    };

    // ... irrelevant stuff

    for (int i = 0; i < parser.request.headerCount; i++) {
        if (strcasecmp(parser.request.headers[i].name, "Content-Length") == 0) {
            parser.request.bodyLength = atoi(parser.request.headers[i].value); // [1]
            break;
        }
    }
    
    parser.request.body = malloc(parser.request.bodyLength + 1); // [2]
    for (int i = parser.position; i < parser.position + parser.request.bodyLength; i++) {
        parser.request.body[i - parser.position] = parser.requestBuffer[i]; // [3]
    }
```

line \[1\] takes Content-Length off the http packet. This is a non validated value basically straight from the socket. line \[2\] allocates based on that size. Line \[3\] copies data into that buffer based on that size. But it's copying **out** of a buffer of _any_ size. So passing a `Content-Length` Larger than the `request` sent in will start copying heap data into the `parser.request.body`.

Another interesting choice in this project is to make lengths signed:

```c
typedef struct {
    //...

    int        headerCount;
    int        headerCapacity;

    //...
    int        bodyLength;
} HttpRequest;

typedef struct {
    // ...
    
    int         position;
    //...
    int         requestLength;
} HttpParser;
```

What does it mean to have a negative `headerCount` or negative of anything here? Maybe there is a valid meaning, but we need to ask ourselves that question. Going back to the original code sample. A malicious user can pass `Content-Length` of `4294967295`. `malloc(parser.request.bodyLength + 1)` which becomes `malloc(0)` actually returns a valid pointer in glibc. Now you won't immediately buffer overflow here because `i < parser.position + parser.request.bodyLength` where i is initialized to `parser.position` and it's basically `parser.position-1` so `i` will always be greater. But these mangled request body and length values get routed to the webdevs App. You'd better hope they catch the issue.

I love C it's simple, elegant but also so dang annoying.

Comments to be found on [this hackernews thread](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=45535183). Ping me there to talk security, C, or graphics and rendering haha :)

* * *