OVM6948 200 x 200 product brief OMNIVISION's OVM6948 CameraCubeChip® is a fully  packaged, wafer-level camera module measuring 0.65 mm x 0.65 mm, with a z-height of just 1.158 mm, ideal  for disposable devices operating from the smallest part of  the anatomy. The camera module is derived from an ultra  small image sensor, the OV6948, winner of the Guinness  World Record for "The Smallest Commercially Available  Image Sensor*," with its size of 0.575 mm x 0.575 mm.
This complete module can be integrated into a disposable  guidewire, catheter or endoscope with a diameter as small as 1.0 mm. With this camera's small size and high 200 x 200, or 40 KPixel backside-illuminated resolution, high quality  images can be captured from within the body's narrowest  blood vessels for neuro, ophthalmic, ENT, cardiac, spinal,  urology, gynecology and arthroscopy procedures.
The OVM6948 is the only ultra small "chip on tip" camera  with backside illumination, which provides excellent image  quality and better low-light performance to help reduce LED  heat, along with improved sensitivity. It offers a compact,  high quality solution for disposable guidewires, catheters and  endoscopes, which are experiencing growing demand  because of their ability to reduce cross-contamination risks,  downtime inefficiencies and costs associated with the  repairs, preprocedural testing and sterilization of reusable  endoscopes. Benefiting from the sensor's low power  consumption of a mere 25 mW, less heat is generated for  better patient comfort and flexible procedure durations.
Other key features of this camera module include a wide  120-degree field of view and an extended focus range of 3 mm to 30 mm. Its image array is capable of capturing 200 x 200 resolution images and video at up to 30 frames  per second, and its analog output that can transmit over 4 meters with minimal noise.
Find out more at www.ovt.com.
Miniature Camera Module Provides High-Quality Imaging for Disposable Medical Guidewires, Catheters and Endoscopes 
OVM6948 Applications •  disposable medical, dental, veterinarian, and industrial endoscopes •    optical size of 1/36" •    non-autoclavable •  AntLinx™ Analog output •  OVM6948-RALA (color, lead-free)     4-pin 40k AntLinx™ Analog CameraCubeChip®, LA silicon, 120° DFOV •    low power consumption •    single 3.3V power supply •    OmniBSI™+ pixel structure     using 0.11 μm process • active array size: 200 x 200 • maximum image transfer rate:     -  40 Kpixel (200 x 200): 30 fps • power supply:     -  analog: 3.3V ±5% • power requirements:     25 mW (with IO consumption) • temperature range:     -  operating: -20°C to +70°C         junction    temperature     -  stable: 0°C to +50°C         junction    temperature • output formats: analog signal output • lens size: 1/36" • diagonal field of view (FOV):     120° ±6.6° • f no.: 2.8 • focal length: 0.175 mm • scan mode: progressive • color mosaic: RGB Bayer pattern • pixel size: 1.75 μm x 1.75 μm • image area: 364 μm x 364 μm • net weight: 0.87 mg • package dimensions     (including ball height):     650 x 650 x 1158 μm Technical Specifications Functional Block Diagram Product Features Ordering Information Version 1.5, March 2023 4275 Burton Drive Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA Tel: + 1 408 567 3000 Fax: + 1 408 567 3001 www.ovt.com OMNIVISION reserves the right to make changes to their products or to discontinue any product or service without further notice. OMNIVISION and the OMNIVISION logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of OmniVision Technologies, Inc. CameraCubeChip is a registered trademark of OmniVision Technologies, Inc. AntLinx and OmniBSI are trademarks of OmniVision Technologies, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
OVM6948 column sample/hold row select lens output timing generator and system control logic image array XVCLK VOUT AMP Current Guinness World record title issued to OmniVision Technologies, Inc.: Smallest Commercially Available Image Sensor.
The smallest commercially available image sensor is the OV6948, measuring 0.575 mm x 0.575 mm x 0.232 mm, made by OmniVision Technologies, Inc. (USA). The record is based on product testing and market research carried out by Transparency Market Research in Pune, India, on 10 April 2019.
*