htmx,-datastar,-greedy-developer[

# drshapeless

](/)

[blog](/blog) | [github](https://github.com/drshapeless)

* * *

# Htmx, Datastar, greedy developer

Tags: [datastar](/blog/tags/datastar.html) | [htmx](/blog/tags/htmx.html)

Create: 2025-07-13, Update: 2025-07-13

# Background

Sometime ago, I was really interested in [htmx](//htmx.org/). I have even built some tools in Emacs for myself to write htmx. But htmx is sometime a pain in the butt, especially for some big form. Therefore, I looked for an alternative.

In some random reddit post, I came across [datastar](//data-star.dev/), which is another hypermedia library, but uses SSE and signals. It claims to have both of the good thing from htmx and [alpine.js](//alpinejs.dev/). The author has a stand that he thought using form in htmx to communicate with server is a mistake, json should be used instead.

# Conversion

I had a running service written in htmx for some time. It is a clinic opening hour service to inform my patients when I will be available in which clinic. (Yes, I am not a programmer, but a healthcare professional.)

I decided to swap my whole service from htmx to datastar. And I have been working on it for a couple of weeks.

# Shocking news

Today, as usual, I open the datastar official site for reference. The site is changed. And the visual is now stunning. I thought it was a great thing, it means the developer is now rapidly working on this good project.

But shockingly, a weird word of [datastar pro](//data-star.dev/reference/datastar_pro) is out. I was at beta v1 before. It is now finally released.

I then look at what pro version gives us. I thought it was just some quality of life add-on like what tailwind components.

But no, the datastar dev somehow move a portion of the freely available features behind a paywall. What the fuck.

Things like replace-url, scroll-into-view which were free, is now NOT free.

With my mouth wide opened, I continue to check out what the price is. A shocking $299 for solo dev.

It is not like $299 is much for me, but I am just a hobbist. I enjoy using the cutting edge technology and framework just for fun. Now the fun is going to cost me money.

I do not make any money with my service. And I don't see a reason to pay features that were free before.

# My decision

I understand open source dev needs money to sponsor their work. However, the way that datastar dev do is utter disgrace.

Just as Reddit user Extreme-Ad-3920 [concluded what I feel](//www.reddit.com/r/datastardev/comments/1lxhdp9/comment/n2o4svg/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web3x&utm_name=web3xcss&utm_term=1&utm_content=share_button).

Fuck you datastar. I am going back to htmx.

* * *

© Jacky Li 2021 - 2025 [Contact via Email](mailto:drsl@drshapeless.com)