A Distributed Emulation Environment for In-Memory Computing Systems Eleni Bougioukou, Anastasios Petropoulos, Nikolaos Toulgaridis, Theodoros Chatzimichail, and Theodore Antonakopoulos Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Patras, Patras, Greece e-mails:{bougioukou, antonako}@upatras.gr,{a.petropoulos, toulgaridis, chatzimichail}@ece.upatras.gr Abstract—In-memory computing technology is used extensively in artificial intelligence devices due to lower power consumption and fast calculation of matrix-based functions. The development of such a device and its integration in a system takes a significant amount of time and requires the use of a real-time emulation envi- ronment, where various system aspects are analyzed, microcode is tested, and applications are deployed, even before the real chip is available. In this work, we present the architecture, the software development tools, and experimental results of a distributed and expandable emulation system for rapid prototyping of integrated circuits  based  on  in-memory  computing  technologies.  Presented experimental results demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed emulator.
Index Terms—In-memory  computing,  Deep  Neural  Networks, MPSoC  FPGAs,  Phase-Change  Memory.
I.  INTRODUCTION Edge  computing  is  a  key  technology  for  the  successful deployment  of  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  by  providing decentralized  processing,  offering  high  processing  rates  with low latency, thus resulting to efficient bandwidth usage and im- proved reliability, due to its fault tolerant approach [1]. One of the most promising technologies used in edge computing de- vices is In-Memory Computing (IMC), which utilizes volatile or  non-volatile  memory  (NVM)  cells  to  store  the  weights  of matrix-based  functions  and  to  perform  in-situ  computations with  reduced  latency  and  less  power  consumption.  Digital IMCs (DIMCs) are based on SRAMs or DRAMs, while analog IMCs  (AIMC)  modules  are  based  on  non-volatile  memories, like PCM [2].
The  development  of  an  edge  computing  accelerator  inte- grated  Circuit  (IC)  is  a  multi-discipline  effort  that  combines (D/A)IMC units, Digital Processing units (DPUs), processors, and peripheral devices [3], [4]. The time required from concept to silicon prototyping, testing and verification is usually many months,  even  years.  This  development  requires  effort  at  var- ious  levels,  such  as  designing  hardware  modules,  microcode development,  algorithms  for  efficient  resource  utilization,  as well as software tools for mapping AI models and framework to  the  IC’s  architecture  [5].  The  development  time  can  be shortened  by  using  an  instrument  that  implements  the  IC’s architecture, and allows preliminary testing and verification of its  functional  modules,  before  having  the  first  IC  prototype and  also  for  validating  the  efficiency  of  various  architectural configurations. Such an instrument may also support real-time emulation,  allowing  rapid  system  prototyping  based  on  the under development IC. Real-time emulation is considered for in-depth  analysis  and  testing  of  various  hardware  modules, for microcode development on embedded processors, and for analyzing the behavior of an embedded system, where the IC will be integrated [6].
The main advantage of such an emulation tool, compared to the actual chip, is that it allows collection of extensive tracing information  and  execution  of  a  practically  unlimited  number of testing sequences from a given state of the device under test (DUT). The latest is impractical in systems based on NVMs, due to the noise introduced during read [7]. When an AIMC- based IC is considered, it is useful to have a versatile emulator to  debug  and  analyze  its  behavior  in-depth,  by  intentionally introducing  noise  that  occurs  in  systems  based  on  NVMs.
As  presented  in  [8],  [9]  such  an  emulator  has  been  used for analyzing the behavior of systems based on NAND Flash memories. Other emulators have been presented in [10], [11].
This  work  presents  a  versatile  and  expandable  instrument, the   In-Memory   Computing   Emulator   (IMCE).   Section   II presents the architecture of IMCE, focusing mainly on the em- ulated,  analog  and  digital,  computing  engines,  while  Section III provides details on its software tools for executing inference of AI models. Section IV describes how the emulator has been used  to  map,  test,  and  analyze  the  behavior  of  classification and object detection models.
II.  THE IN-MEMORY COMPUTING EMULATOR The  presented  instrument  is  based  on  a  Front  End  unit (IMCE-FE),  multiple  Processing  Units  (IMCE-PUs)  and  a Configuration  and  Data  Analytics  server  (IMCE-CDA),  as shown  in  Fig.  1.  For  supporting  the  functionality  of  any node  of  a  Deep  Neural  Network  (DNN)  and  for  emulating all  computing  technologies,  there  are  two  types  of  IMCE- PUs,  analog  (AnPU)  and  digital  (DiPU),  each  of  them  using a custom hardware accelerator, marked as An/Di-Accelerator.
The  various  IMCE  units  communicate  using  1  or  10  Gbps links, while the IMCE-PUs are organized as Neural Processing Unit (NPU) clusters, and multiple NPU clusters are intercon- nected to form a large emulation environment. Since each PU can  support  multiple  DNN  nodes,  the  Emulator  can  be  used to  support  large  DNNs.  The  IMCE-PUs  follow  a  compute- and-forward  approach  to  implement  the  inference  engine  of a  DNN.  Whenever  data  are  in  their  input  buffers,  processing starts immediately, and then the output data are forwarded to the next IMCE-PUs, according to the DNN’s inference graph.
Following  that  approach,  maximum  pipelining  is  achieved resulting to improved processing rates.
© 2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/I2MTC62753.2025.11078997 arXiv:2510.08257v1  [cs.ET]  9 Oct 2025 
Front-End  Unit  (FE) Configuration Server  and Data Analytics CPU Ubuntu (Diolkos) Shared DRAM ComEng  ComEng  (S) X-ports Gbps Ethernet Switch Processing Unit (PU-1) F-threads ComEng  (S) Shared DRAM CCU An/Di Accelerator Processing Unit (PU-k) F-threads ComEng  (S) Shared DRAM CCU An/Di Accelerator X-ports Gbps Ethernet Switch NPU  Cluster  #1 Processing Unit (PU-1) F-threads ComEng  (S) Shared DRAM CCU An/Di Accelerator Processing Unit (PU-k) F-threads ComEng  (S) Shared DRAM CCU An/Di Accelerator X-ports Gbps Ethernet Switch NPU  Cluster  #N Fig. 1: The IMCE Architecture The IMCE-FE unit supports the electrical interfaces of the emulated  IC,  allowing  the  IMCE  to  be  used  with  the  IC’s testing and verification platform. For that purpose, a dedicated IMCE-FE  unit  has  to  be  developed  for  each  emulated  IC.
The  IMCE-FE  is  based  on  a  dedicated  FPGA  and  facilitates communication  with  the  IMCE-CDA  server  and  the  IMCE- PUs via a high-speed (1 or 10 Gbps) link.
Each  IMCE  unit  uses  a  dedicated  communication  engine (ComEng) for reliable data exchange with other IMCEs. When Gbps  Ethernet  is  used,  the  ComEng  units  use  the  TCP/IP protocol for data transactions. The multiple ComEng units and the interconnected switches emulate the data flow mechanism used inside the IC for data exchange between the various DNN nodes, supporting reliable, transparent, and non-blocking data transfers between the various units of the IC.
The  IMCE-CDA  unit  is  used  for  setting  up  the  IMCE according to the characteristics of the target DNN. The IMCE- CDA utilizes custom software tools for mapping an AI model to  the  IMCE  ’s  internal  architecture,  as  described  in  Section III. The IMCE-CDA may also act as a data generator during verification  and  accuracy  measurements,  and  it  also  supports the  IMCE  demonstrators.  The  IMCE-CDA  uses  a  custom technology  with  shared  DRAM  (a  few  x10  of  Gbytes)  to collect  statistical  data  with  minimum  latency  from  all  nodes during  inference,  allowing  the  development  of  various  data analysis tools [11].
Each IMCE-PU is implemented in a single FPGA board and can  support  multiple  DNN  nodes  concurrently.  As  shown  in Fig. 2a, each IMCE-PU has four Arm Cortex-A53 superscalar processors  and  two  Arm  Cortex-R5F  processors,  optimized for  demanding  real-time  applications.  One  of  the  R5  cores (R5-0)  is  used  to  implement  the  ComEng  unit  of  each  PU, while  the  other  R5  core  (R5-1)  is  used  to  assist  the  An/Di- Accelerators described in the following subsections. Commu- nication  between  these  processors  is  facilitated  through  the inter-processor interrupt (IPI) mechanism for exchanging short interrupt-driven messages and shared DRAM memory for data exchange.  The  microcode  of  an  IMCE-PU  is  organized  as shown  in  Fig.  2b.  Each  node  of  the  emulated  DNN  has  a dedicated F-thread, which is executed on the A53 processors, and the An/Di-Accelerator is used whenever it is required.
In  a  DNN  graph,  a  node  receives  data  from  one  or  more nodes  and  sends  its  output  data  to  one  or  more  other  nodes.
To support this functionality, a dedicated pair of S-threads per graph transition is used, implemented on the R5-1 processors of  two  interconnected  nodes.  That  approach  allows  dynamic allocation  of  the  available  resources,  and  thus,  maximum performance  is  achieved.  In  addition  to  the  F/S-threads  used for  the  DNN  nodes,  a  dedicated  set  of  F/S-threads  is  always active in each IMCE-PU and is used for communicating with the  CDA  server.  This  communication  is  used  for  configuring the  IMCE  according  to  the  graph  of  a  DNN,  activating  the ARM 4 x A53 IPI Shared DRAM (2 GB) ARM R5-1 ARM R5-0 Accelerator An/Di Eth URAMs ARM 4 x A53 ARM 4 x A53 ARM 4 x A53 ARM  (4 x A53) F1-thread                                      F1-thread Fk-thread                                      Fk-thread ARM R5-0 An/Di Accelerator Sin_1 Sin_n Sout_1 Sout_m I P I I P I ARM R5-1 ARM R5-1 S0-thread F0-thread  (Configuration – Debugging – Statistics) (a) (b) Fig. 2: The IMCE-PU Architecture 
required sets of F/S-threads, programming each F-thread with proper parameters e.g. weights, biases, and finally controlling the inference engine. When inference is running, data may be collected for debugging and statistical analysis purposes, either in  sync  with  the  application  running  on  the  CDA  server,  or asynchronously using the shared memory of CDA. These data may include processing data, execution times of all processing phases, resources utilization, etc..
The CDA is a Linux-based server that communicates with the  IMCE-PUs  either  using  a  client-server  model  (TCP/IP connections) or asynchronously over shared memory. For that purpose,  the  CDA’s  DRAM  memory  is  functionally  divided into  two  distinct  memory  areas.  The  first  area  is  used  ex- clusively  by  the  CDA  OS  (Ubuntu),  while  the  second  one, called hidden memory, is used only for data exchange with the IMCE-PUs. It is called hidden since the OS cannot access this area directly, but only through the Diolkos technology libraries [11]. The hidden memory is divided into multiple regions, each dedicated to a single IMCE-PU. That approach minimizes the workload on the available communication resources and allows the  development  of  high-level  applications  by  processing  the collected  statistical  data,  without  direct  communication  with the IMCE-PUs.
As  mentioned  above,  there  are  two  types  of  IMCE-PUs, AnPU and DiPU, each with a custom hardware accelerator: • AnPU: It is used to emulate analog Matrix-Vector Multi- plication  (MVMs)  and  activation  operations,  required  by  the DNN target model. It also may perform convolution operations by  converting  them  into  a  series  of  MVMs  using  the  im2col transformation on the input feature map [12]. Digital Matrix- Vector  Multiplications,  Gemms  (General  Matrix  Multiplica- tions), and convolutions can also be implemented in this unit, emulating the respective functionality of the DPUs.
• DiPU: It acts as a Data Processing Unit (DPU), handling various  digital  operations  such  as  Addition,  Splitting,  Max Pooling.  It  also  handles  the  operations  of  DNN  workloads that must be executed at a higher dynamic range for accuracy concerns,  exploiting  floating-point  arithmetic.  The  DiPU  is also used to implement operations found in the workloads that are not supported by the AnPUs.
Currently  an  IMCE  setup  has  been  installed,  using  24 Ultrascale+ FPGA boards, organized in 4 NPU clusters, with 6 boards per cluster, as shown in Fig. 3. The communication network is 1 Gbps Ethernet.
In  the  following  subsections  more  detailed  information  is given for the An/Di-Accelerators.
Front-End  Unit Gbps Ethernet Power Supply Node -1 Node -24 NPU Cluster Fig. 3: The IMCE with 4 NPU clusters A.  The An-Accelerator The An-Accelerator is the main hardware module of AnPUs and   achieves   fast   execution   of   all   analog   functions   sup- ported by the IMCE. The maximum supported matrix size is 4096x512 with any possible combination of x16 values in row or/and column. The input values and the weights/coefficients support INT8 arithmetic, while FP32 is used for scaling. The An-Accelerator consists of three functional units: 1.  The  MVM  Computing  Engine  performs  all  necessary inner product calculations in a parallel fashion, achieving high processing rates. This unit is optimized for parallel processing, by  exploiting  512  DSP48E2  units  in  parallel  for  Multiply- Accumulate  (MAC)  operations.  Each  DSP48E2  unit  handles one  dot  product,  ensuring  efficient  computation  of  the  entire matrix.
2.  The  Weights  Loader  loads  the  weights  matrix  from  the board’s DRAM to the Ultra-RAM (URAM) memories.
3.  The  Data  Streamer  transfers  data  from/to  the  DRAM memory to/from the MVM Computing Engine.
Although   the   basic   function   supported   by   the   An- Accelerator  is  MVM  calculation,  it  is  also  used  to  sup- port  efficiently  Conv2D  operations.  The  Conv2D  operation is  a  cornerstone  function  in  Convolutional  Neural  Networks (CNNs) [13], serving as a mechanism to extract features from input  data.  Implementing  Conv2D  using  multiple  MVMs  is a  well-acknowledged  technique  to  harness  the  computational efficiency of hardware architectures.
The  transformation  of  a  Conv2D  operation  into  multiple MVMs is facilitated through a technique known as im2col.The im2col  method  takes  the  input  feature  map  and  turns  it  into patches. Each patch has a size determined by the convolutional kernel  and  the  number  of  input  channels.  These  patches are  then  reshaped  into  a  matrix  format  suitable  for  matrix multiplication.  The  reshaped  matrix  is  then  multiplied  by  a filter  matrix  to  generate  the  output  feature  map.  In  an  An- Accelerator,  this  is  achieved  by  exploiting  the  functionality of  the  MVM  Computing  Engine.  Table  I  shows  indicative experimental results for the An-Accelerator.
TABLE I: An-Accelerator functions and execution times FunctionParametersExecution  Time MVM128x1280.70 usecs MVM512x5122.70 usecs MVM4096x51221.60 usecs Convolution(64, 576) - 64 MVMs5.27 msecs Convolution with ReLu(32, 288) - 256 MVMs6.32 msecs B.  The Di-Accelerator The  Di-Accelerator  is  the  main  hardware  module  of  Di- PUs,  that  allows  fast  execution  of  any  digital  function  sup- ported by the IMCE. The Di-Accelerator is a highly efficient computational  module  engineered  to  optimize  and  expedite a  range  of  critical  digital  operations  in  AI  models.  These operations  address  essential  computational  tasks  for  efficient model execution and performance enhancement. Currently, the Di-Accelerators support the following key digital functions: 
• Addition with/without Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU): This operation performs element-wise summation across tensors or arrays, with the option to apply the ReLU activation function.
ReLU  is  applied  after  computing  the  element-wise  addition, thereby retaining only non-negative values.
•  Sigmoid  Linear  Unit  (SiLU):  This  function  applies  the SiLU  activation  function,  which  enhances  non-linearity  by multiplying  the  sigmoid  of  the  input  with  the  input  itself, yielding smooth gradients and improved convergence in NNs.
•  Max/Average  Pooling:  It  executes  downsampling  by  se- lecting   the   maximum/mean   value   within   defined   pooling windows,  an  operation  essential  for  reducing  dimensionality while retaining critical data features. Average pooling offers a smoother aggregation approach for downsampling.
•  Concatenation: This function joins multiple tensors along a specified axis, effectively merging them into a unified tensor, often used to combine feature maps in neural networks.
•  Splitting:  It  decomposes  a  tensor  into  sub-tensors  along a  designated  dimension,  enabling  efficient  segmentation  and parallel processing of tensor data.
The  Di-Accelerator  has  custom  hardware  engines  for  each of these functions and fast data transfers are achieved by using dedicated  DMA  engines.  Due  to  the  parallel  architecture  of these modules, the processing rate is equal to the transfer rates of  the  used  DMAs,  and  the  introduced  latency  is  negligibly greater  than  the  time  required  to  transfer  the  data  from  the memory  to  the  accelerator  and  vice-versa.  Table  II  shows indicative experimental results for the Di-Accelerator.
TABLE II: Di-Accelerator functions and execution times FunctionParametersExecution  Time Add with/without ReLU16 KB55.0 us SiLU16 KB54.7 us Concatenation4x 64 KB→ 1x256 KB244.5 us Splitting1x256 KB→ 4x 64 KB244.5 us Max Pooling [C,H,W][128, 20, 20] B8.9 ms Average Pooling [C,H,W][128, 20, 20] B15.9 ms III.  THE EMULATOR’S SOFTWARE TOOLS For  the  deployment  of  AI  models  on  the  IMCE-PUs,  a top-down  software  stack  is  needed,  to  support  various  AI frameworks  and  generate  the  necessary  files  for  configuring the  IMCE  boards.  Several  procedures  are  required  to  be implemented in this stack, such as optimization, quantization, graph  parsing,  etc.,  as  described  below.  The  AI  models  to IMCE  software  stack,  shown  in  Fig.  4,  was  designed  as  a general framework to facilitate the deployment of AI models on  the  IMCE  setup.  This  software  stack  consists  of  3  main blocks: • Frameworks and AI Models: This block is responsible for development and training of AI models of various frameworks.
The  trained  models  are  exported  in  the  ONNX  format  for compatibility with the subsequent tools in the IMCE toolflow.
•  AI Framework2IMCE  Software  Kit  with  Configuration Tools  and  RunTime:  This  block  provides  the  necessary  tools to  download  and  run  an  AI  model  on  the  IMCE.  It  starts with the High-level Transformation Tools (HTT) that process Linux Character Device File Diolkos  Device Driver (DiDD) or Memory Access (DiMA) Diolkos Software Library  (DiSL) TCP/IP Diolkos  Relay Functions (DiRF) Server Board/Network Configurator  RunTime Frameworks AI Models AI_Framework2IMCE Software Kit Inference Input Data and Analysis NVM Noise  High-level Transformation Tools  (HTT)  Hardware-related Configuration Tools (HCT) Gbps Ethernet Fig. 4: From AI models to IMCE the  AI  model,  optimize  and  quantize  it  according  to  the IMCE characteristics, and produce the parameters of each node that  has  to  be  implemented  in  an  IMCE-PU.  The  Hardware- related  Configuration  Tools  (HCT)  map  the  nodes  to  the available FPGA boards and produce all required files for the Board/Network Configurator application, which initializes and configures  the  IMCE-PUs.  If  needed,  the  NVM  Noise  block is activated to introduce noise to the model, according to the NVM  technology  used,  and  finally  the  RunTime  application handles the model’s inference on the IMCE-PUs.
•  Diolkos  Software:  The  IMCE  exploits  the  Diolkos  soft- ware  stack,  which  consists  of  software  modules  that  allow the  interface  of  CDA  applications  with  the  IMCE-PUs.  The Diolkos  Software  Library  (DiSL)  is  the  main  cross-platform library  that  provides  a  programming  interface  for  interacting with  the  IMCE-PUs.  Diolkos  Memory  Access  (DiMA)  is a  Linux  kernel  character  device  module  used  for  server’s shared  memory.  Diolkos  Relay  Functions  (DiRF)  are  Linux applications  that  can  access  the  Server’s  shared  memory  on behalf of the IMCE-PUs by making system calls to the DiMA software module.
Fig.  5  provides  a  detailed  representation  of  the  AI  Frame- work2IMCE  Software  Kit.  The  IMCE  software  stack  starts with a model in the ONNX format and produces system files that  describe  the  IMCE  connectivity  (.dfl)  and  configuration files per IMCE-PU that the Board/Network Configurator uses 
_.onnx Quantization Optimizer _qopt.onnx _opt.onnx Graph Parser Node Connections FPGA OP  types Postprocessing FPGA Info List Node  Adjacency Matrix OnnxRuntime  Library Emulator HW Info Nodes2Boards Mapper Boards Configuration Files 
.cfg #1         .     .     .     #N
.dfl HTT HCT Fig. 5: The ONNX to IMCE software tools to initialize the whole setup.
A.  High-level Transformation Tools The HTT translate an ONNX model to the files FPGA Info List  and  Node  Adjacency  Matrix  necessitated  by  the  FPGAs that use the An/Di accelerators. To generate these files several processing steps are implemented. The initial ONNX graph is optimized  and  quantized  and,  it  is  also  fused  after  merging and filtering specific operations that the hardware accelerator necessitates, according to the information in FPGA OP types.
•  ONNX  Runtime  Optimizer  and  Quantization:  The  HTT leverage  the  ONNX  Runtime  library  [14]  to  optimize  and quantize DNNs for deployment on IMCE boards. The current toolflow  utilizes  critical  optimizations  to  simplify  the  model and then quantize it using the Tensor-oriented (QDQ) format and static symmetric quantization.
• Graph Parser: A custom parser architecture traverses the graph  in  topological  order,  extracting  node-specific  informa- tion,  including  its  name,  operation  type,  input/output  tensor names,  shapes  and  connections  as  well  as  scales,  weights, biases  and  operation  attributes.  Also,  it  fuses  operations  into FPGA-supported patterns, such as Conv + ReLU to FusedCon- vReLU, and removes redundant operations, such as Flatten and Reshape, due to the hardware treatment of tensor shapes as 1D linear memory structures.
• Postprocessing: In this final step, Conv operation weights are  reshaped  from  a  4D  to  2D  format,  to  align  with  the  An- accelerator architecture, which supports MVM operations for Conv2D operations using the im2col scheme. Additionally, the required quantization parameters (scales) for all operations are extracted from the parsed graph.
• Node Connections: The node connections is extracted from the optimized ONNX graph, applying fusion and merging of node operations for establishing new connections.
B.  Hardware-related Configuration Tools The HCT initialize and configure the IMCE boards. These tools  utilize  the  files  generated  by  the  HTT,  along  with  the information about available resources of the whole setup. The process is as follows: •  Nodes2Boards  Mapper:  It  maps  the  nodes  of  the  parsed graph  to  FPGA  boards,  determining  which  specific  boards will  function  as  An  or  Di  accelerators.  The  nodes-to-boards mapping  can  be  performed  using  various  algorithms,  like targeting maximum processing rate, minimum latency or best resource  utilization.  The  mapper  takes  as  input  the  FPGA Info  List  and  the  Node  Adjacency  Matrix  files  as  well  as  the Emulator  HW  Info  file  which  contains  information  about  the FPGA Boards including the total number of available boards, the  maximum  number  of  operations  (F-threads)  supported by  each  board  and  the  maximum  number  of  active  TCP/IP Connections (S-threads).
• Boards Configuration Files: It is the main tool that initial- izes and configures all the IMCE boards of the Emulator using files  generated  by  the  previous  tools.  It  opens  configuration connections,  one  per  board,  and  loads  all  the  configuration files  regarding  the  AIMC  parameters  (weights,  scales,  bias), the configuration information of the F/S threads and the used NVM noise model. Finally, it establishes all necessary TCP/IP connections  between  the  boards.  After  this  initialization,  the IMCE RunTime is ready to be executed.
IV.  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION The  initial  models  executed  on  the  IMCE  were  ResNet8 and  ResNet18  [15],  which  leverage  convolutional  layers  for efficient feature extraction. ResNet8 is the smallest variant of the ResNet family trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. It consists of  14  nodes,  including  9  Convolutions  followed  by  ReLU,  1 Average  Pool,  1  MVM,  and  3  Additions  followed  by  ReLU.
In  our  toolflow,  the  convolution  and  addition  nodes  followed by ReLU are merged as FusedConvReLU and FusedAddReLU operators. The additions are assigned to DiPUs, while all other operations  are  assigned  to  AnPUs,  with  the  average  pooling operation implemented as a convolution.
The accuracy results of the ResNet8 model using the ONNX Runtime with FP32 and INT8 formats, along with the IMCE, are shown in Table III. These measurements demonstrate that the  IMCE  achieves  high  accuracy,  which  is  consistent  with the  theoretical  model,  making  it  well-suited  for  studying  the behavior of a DNN model that can be adapted to the available computing resources.
The  ResNet18  model  is  more  complex  than  the  ResNet8 variant.  It  consists  of  31  nodes,  with  20  Convolutions  (11 followed by ReLU), 1 Max Pooling, 8 Additions with ReLU, 1 Average Pooling and 1 MVM. The typical ResNet18 network is  trained  using  images  of  input  size  of  224-by-224,  as  the ImageNet  dataset.  In  this  work,  we  used  a  ResNet18  with 
a  smaller  image  size,  based  on  the  CIFAR-10  dataset.  In that  case  the  model’s  structure  remained  the  same,  but  a smaller number of weights was used. The so-called ResNet18s (ResNet18small) model, consists of 30 nodes eliminating the max-pooling  operation  with  respect  to  the  original  model.
Since the total number of nodes exceeds the available FPGA boards, multiple nodes are executed on a single board. Out of the 24 boards, 16 are used as AnPUs (handling convolutions, convolution  with  ReLU  and  MVM),  and  the  remaining  8 are  used  as  DiPUs  (handling  additions).  The  average  pool operation is also implemented as convolution in an AnPU. For ResNet8 the processing rate is 39 images/sec and the latency is 121 msecs, while for ResNet18 are 18 images/sec and 444 msecs respectively. The accuracy results of Table III indicate that the IMCE achieves accuracy as the OnnxRuntime model.
The YOLOv8n, which is part of the YOLO (You Only Look Once)  family  of  models  [16]  was  also  be  used  for  IMCE evaluation.  YOLOv8n  is  a  lightweight  variant,  designed  for real-time object detection, particularly suited for applications with limited computational resources, making it ideal for edge AI  tasks.  This  model  was  used  as  input  to  the  toolflow  of Section  III.  The  Graph  Parser  merged  sequences  of  Sigmoid and  Mul  nodes  into  SiLU  operations  and  the  convolution nodes, followed by SiLU, into FusedConvSiLU operations.
The   experimental   results   are   shown   in   Table   IV.   The analysis of both mAP50-95 and mAP50 metrics demonstrates that  the  experimental  model  aligns  remarkably  well  with  its theoretical  counterpart,  when  both  models  are  quantized  to INT8 precision. For mAP50-95, which measures performance across multiple IoU thresholds, the theoretical model achieves 0.345, while the experimental model reaches 0.344, reflecting consistent  detection  quality  across  varying  object  sizes  and complexities. Similarly, for mAP50, which evaluates detection accuracy at a fixed IoU threshold of 50%, the theoretical model achieves  0.491,  and  the  experimental  model  closely  follows with  0.490.  For  comparison,  Table  IV  also  includes  results for  the  FP32  model,  which  highlights  the  trade-offs  between precision  and  computational  efficiency.  These  results  confrm the   robustness   of   the   experimental   INT8   implementation, demonstrating  its  ability  to  perform  nearly  identical  to  the theoretical design, while validating its practical reliability.
V.  CONCLUSIONS A flexible, expandable and accurate in-memory computing emulator  for  AI  integrated  circuits  has  been  presented.  The emulator  is  based  on  multiple  analog  and  digital  processing units  that  cover  all  functions  of  classification  and  object detection  models.  The  development  of  additional  functions for  other  types  of  DNNs  is  in  progress  and  they  can  easily integrated  to  the  IMCE  PUs.  The  emulator  is  also  supported by  various  software  tools,  providing  a  clear  road-map  from DNN models to inference execution.
VI.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been performed in the framework of the EU project ”NeuroSoC: A multiprocessor system on chip with in- TABLE III: ResNet experimental results ResNet8AccuracyResNet18Accuracy OnnxRT (FP32)88.61 %OnnxRT (INT8)93.17 % OnnxRT (INT8)88.25 %IMCE93.10 % IMCE88.18 % TABLE IV: Yolov8n experimental results MetricOnnxRTOnnxRTIMCE (FP32)(INT8)(INT8) Recall0.4760.4660.442 Precision0.6290.5800.585 MAP500.5200.4910.490 MAP50-950.3700.3450.344 memory neural processing unit”, HORIZON-101070634 [17].
REFERENCES [1]  F.  C.  Andriulo  et  al.,  “Edge  Computing  and  Cloud  Computing  for Internet of Things: A Review,” Informatics, vol. 11, no. 4, 2024.
[2]  G.  Ottavi  et  al.,  “End-to-end  100-TOPS/W  Inference  With  Analog In-Memory  Computing:  Are  We  There  Yet?”  in  2021  IEEE  3rd  In- ternational  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  Circuits  and  Systems (AICAS), 2021, pp. 1–4.
[3]  M. Gallo et al., “A 64-core mixed-signal in-memory compute chip based on  phase-change  memory  for  deep  neural  network  inference,”  Nature Electronics, vol. 6, pp. 1–14, 08 2023.
[4]  P.  Houshmand  et  al.,  “DIANA:  An  End-to-End  Hybrid  DIgital  and ANAlog  Neural  Network  SoC  for  the  Edge,”  IEEE  Journal  of  Solid- State Circuits, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 203–215, 2023.
[5]  K. J. Lee, J. Lee, S. Choi, and H.-J. Yoo, “The Development of Silicon for  AI:  Different  Design  Approaches,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 4719–4732, 2020.
[6]  M.  AbdElSalam  and  A.  Salem,  “SoC  verification  platforms  using  HW emulation   and   co-modeling   Testbench   technologies,”   in   2015   10th International Design & Test Symposium (IDT), 2015, pp. 14–19.
[7]  J. Henkel et al., “Special Session - Non-Volatile Memories: Challenges and  Opportunities  for  Embedded  System  Architectures  with  Focus  on Machine  Learning  Applications,”  in  2023  International  Conference  on Compilers, Architecture, and Synthesis for Embedded Systems (CASES), 2023, pp. 11–20.
[8]  E.  Bougioukou  et  al.,  “A  Real-Time  Non-Volatile  Memory  Analyzer and  its  Use  on  the  Evaluation  of  Storage  Devices  based  on  NAND Flash  Memories,”  in  2020  IEEE  International  Instrumentation  and Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[9]  N.  Toulgaridis  et  al.,  “Real-Time  emulation  and  analysis  of  multiple NAND  flash  channels  in  solid-state  storage  device,”  Microprocessors and Microsystems, vol. 74, p. 102986, 2020.
[10]  A. Prodromakis et al., “Emulating the aging of NAND Flash memories as  a  time-variant  communications  channel,”  in  2014  6th  International Symposium  on  Communications,  Control  and  Signal  Processing  (IS- CCSP), 2014, pp. 278–281.
[11]  E. Bougioukou et al., “A Non-Volatile Memory Emulation Tool and its Use  in  Analyzing  eMMC-based  Devices,”  in  2023  IEEE  International Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC), vol.
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2023, pp. 1–6.
[12]  S.-S. Park and K. Chung, “CONNA: Configurable Matrix Multiplication Engine for Neural Network Acceleration,” Electronics, vol. 11, p. 2373, 07 2022.
[13]  V.   Ferrari   and   G.   C.   S.   de   Ara ́ujo,   “Improving   Convolutions with   Tensor   Hardware   Accelerators,”   2021.   [Online].   Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245383607 [14]  Microsoft. [Online]. Available: https://onnxruntime.ai [15]  K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition,”  in  Proceedings  of  2016  IEEE  Conference  on  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, ser. CVPR ’16.    IEEE, Jun. 2016, pp.
770–778.
[16]  Ultralytics. [Online]. Available: https://docs.ultralytics.com [17]  NeuroSoC. [Online]. Available: https://neurosoc.eu/