Chris's Wiki :: blog/tech/SSDWritePerfMetricsWish   

[Chris Siebenmann](/~cks/) :: [CSpace](/~cks/space/) » [blog](/~cks/space/blog/) » [tech](/~cks/space/blog/tech/) » SSDWritePerfMetricsWish

Welcome, guest.

## I wish SSDs gave you CPU performance style metrics about their activity

October 18, 2025

Modern CPUs have an impressive collection of performance counters for detailed, low level information on things like cache misses, branch mispredictions, various sorts of stalls, and so on; on Linux you can use 'perf list' to see them all. Modern SSDs (NVMe, SATA, and SAS) are all internally quite complex, and their behavior under load depends on a lot of internal state. It would be nice to have CPU performance counter style metrics to expose some of those details. For a relevant example that's on my mind ([cf](/~cks/space/blog/tech/JournalCanSerializeFsyncWrites)), it certainly would be interesting to know how often flash writes had to stall while blocks were hastily erased, or the current erase rate.

Having written this, I checked some of our SSDs (the ones I'm most interested in at the moment) and I see that our SATA SSDs do expose some of this information as (vendor specific) [SMART](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S.M.A.R.T.) attributes, with things like 'block erase count' and 'NAND GB written' to TLC or SLC (as well as the host write volume and so on stuff you'd expect). [NVMe does this in a different way](/~cks/space/blog/tech/NVMeAndSMART) that doesn't have the sort of easy flexibility that [SMART attributes](/~cks/space/blog/tech/SMARTAttributeNamesMadeUp) do, so a random one of [ours](https://support.cs.toronto.edu/) that I checked doesn't seem to provide this sort of lower level information.

It's understandable that SSD vendors don't necessarily want to expose this sort of information, but it's quite relevant if you're trying to understand unusual drive performance. For example, for your workload do you need to [TRIM your drives](/~cks/space/blog/tech/SSDsAndBlockDiscardTrim) more often, or do they have enough pre-erased space available when you need it? Since TRIM has an overhead, you may not want to blindly do it on a frequent basis (and its full effects aren't entirely predictable since they depend on how much the drive decides to actually erase in advance).

(Having looked at SMART 'block erase count' information on one of our servers, it's definitely doing something when the server is under heavy fsync() load, but I need to cross-compare the numbers from it to other systems in order to get a better sense of what's exceptional and what's not.)

I'm currently more focused on write related metrics, but there's probably important information that could be exposed for reads and for other operations. I'd also like it if SSDs provided counters for how many of various sorts of operations they saw, because while your operating system can in theory provide this, it often doesn't (or doesn't provide them at the granularity of, say, how many writes with 'Force Unit Access' or how many 'Flush' operations were done).

(In Linux, I think I'd have to extract this low level operation information in an ad-hoc way with eBPF tracing.)

Written on [18](/~cks/space/blog/2025/10/18/) [October](/~cks/space/blog/2025/10/) [2025](/~cks/space/blog/2025/).  

«

[A (filesystem) journal can be a serialization point for durable writes](/~cks/space/blog/tech/JournalCanSerializeFsyncWrites)

These are my [WanderingThoughts](/~cks/space/blog/)  
([About the blog](/~cks/space/AboutBlog))

[Full index of entries](/~cks/space/blog/__Index)  
[Recent comments](/~cks/space/blog/__RecentComments)

This is part of [CSpace](/~cks/space/FrontPage), and is written by [ChrisSiebenmann](/~cks/space/People/ChrisSiebenmann).  
Mastodon: [@cks](https://mastodon.social/@cks)  
Twitter @thatcks

\* \* \*

Categories: [links](/~cks/space/blog/links/), [linux](/~cks/space/blog/linux/), [programming](/~cks/space/blog/programming/), [python](/~cks/space/blog/python/), [snark](/~cks/space/blog/snark/), [solaris](/~cks/space/blog/solaris/), [spam](/~cks/space/blog/spam/), [sysadmin](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/), [tech](/~cks/space/blog/tech/), [unix](/~cks/space/blog/unix/), [web](/~cks/space/blog/web/)  
Also: [(Sub)topics](/~cks/space/blog/__Topics)

This is a [DWiki](/~cks/space/dwiki/DWiki).  
[GettingAround](/~cks/space/help/GettingAround)  
([Help](/~cks/space/help/Help))

Search: 

* * *

Page tools: [View Source](/~cks/space/blog/tech/SSDWritePerfMetricsWish?source), [Add Comment](/~cks/space/blog/tech/SSDWritePerfMetricsWish?writecomment).

Search: 

Login:  Password:    

* * *

Last modified: Sat Oct 18 22:54:39 2025  

This dinky wiki is brought to you by the Insane Hackers Guild, Python sub-branch.