The trinary dream endures        

[Blog](/lab/) [About](/about/) [Moonbound](/moonbound/) [Shop](/shop/)

This is a post from [Robin Sloan](/)’s lab blog & notebook. You can [visit the blog’s homepage](/lab/), or [learn more about me](/about/).

# [The trinary dream endures](/lab/trinary-dream/)

October 19, 2025

Since the beginning, there has been an alter­na­tive vision for computing, not binary but [trinary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ternary_computer?utm_source=Robin_Sloan_sent_me), also called ternary. (“Tri­nary” sounds so much better to me.)

Tri­nary didn’t make any headway in the 20th century; binary’s direct map­ping to the “on”/”off” states of elec­tric cur­rent was just too effective, or seductive; but remember that elec­tric cur­rent _isn’t actually_ “on” or “off”. It has taken a ton of engi­neering to “simulate” those abstract states in real, phys­ical circuits, espe­cially as they have gotten smaller and smaller.

Tri­nary is philo­soph­i­cally appealing because its ground-floor vocab­u­lary isn’t “yes” and “no”, but rather: “yes”, “no”, and “maybe”. It’s prob­ably a bit much to imagine that this archi­tec­tural dif­fer­ence could cas­cade up through the layers of abstrac­tion and tend to pro­duce soft­ware with subtler, richer values … yet I do imagine it.

Tri­nary might still have its day. You can train [a capable and super-efficient lan­guage model](https://github.com/microsoft/BitNet?utm_source=Robin_Sloan_sent_me) using weights of only -1, 0, and 1, and I believe many models in the future will use this architecture.

Viva la “maybe”!

[To the blog home page](/lab/)

I’m [Robin Sloan](https://www.robinsloan.com/about?utm_source=Robin_Sloan_sent_me), a writer, printer, & manufacturer. The best thing to do here is sign up for my email newsletter: 

This web­site doesn’t col­lect any infor­ma­tion about you or your reading. It aspires to the speed and pri­vacy of the printed page.

Don’t miss [the colophon](/colophon/). Hony soyt qui mal pence