The Programmer Identity Crisis ❈ Simon Højberg ❈ Principal Frontend Engineer              

[](/ "home")

Oct 7, 2025

❈

14 min read

❈

*   LLMs
*   Programming
*   Culture

# The Programmer Identity Crisis

## On AI, Creativity, and Craft

Close Session

Start chat session

  Svirfneblin...

Close Session

I am a programmer. A coder. A keyboard cowboy. A hacker. My day is spent punching keys; catalyzing code. It’s fun; it’s my identity. The editor, Vim, is my workshop, my sanctum[1](#user-content-fn-1). Here, I hone my craft, sharpen my tools, expand my capabilities through curiosity, and for a while, escape into a trance-like flow. A full-screen terminal window with nothing between me and thought but INSERT mode. At the altar of Bram[2](#user-content-fn-2), I spin reality’s yarn out of thin air into bits beaming through silicon. A completely imagined, non-tangible world with IRL ramifications. A place in which I find comfort in craft and creativity. Time disappears into puzzle-solving. Where connecting pieces matters more than completing a picture. Craft springs from fingers to buffer. I program and fade away into flow and composition.

In the late 1950s at MIT, a new and electrifying culture was emerging. Hands-on, experimental, and anti-establishment. I like to imagine myself there, sitting at the slate-blue L-shaped console. Typing away at the Flexowriter[3](#user-content-fn-3) as it spits out punched paper tape programs to be fed to the nearby wall of metal uprights, tangled wire, and early transistors; the “Tixo”[4](#user-content-fn-4). Waiting with bated breath, as enthralling beeps emanate from the machinery while it runs the program: will it succeed? I imagine the Hackers—as they came to be known—around me, pointing at code and offering advice on how to achieve “The Right Thing”[5](#user-content-fn-5): the perfect program, pristine, elegant, and succinct. I can sense the original culture of programming pouring out of them as they passionately embody [“The Hacker Ethic”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hacker_ethic) while sharing stubs of their own paper programs to guide me on my quest.

It was there—in the computing crucible of building 26—that the craft of coding was cast. Nearly 70 years ago, members of the Tech Model Railroad Club immersed themselves in the language of machines to pursue a mastery of digital wizardry. The sublime magic of manipulating formal languages to solve increasingly challenging cryptic conundrums and—core to the culture—sharing findings with other students of the dark arts of software sorcery.

The ghosts of ancient Hackers past still roam the machines and—through the culture they established—our minds. Their legacy of the forging of craft lingers. A deep and kinetic craft we’ve extended and built a passionate industry on. We are driven by the same wonder, sense of achievement, and elegance of puzzle-solving as they were. Still driven by “The Right Thing.” These constitutional ideas, the very identity of programmers, are increasingly imperiled. Under threat. The future of programming, once so bright and apparent, is now cloaked in foreboding darkness, grifts, and uncertainty.

* * *

In fact, if we are to trust the billion-dollar AI industry, the denizens of Hacker News (and its overlords), and the LinkedIn legions of LLM lunatics, the future of software development has little resemblance to programming. Vibe-coding—what seemed like a meme a year ago—is becoming a mainstay.

Presently (though this changes constantly), the court of vibe fanatics would have us write specifications in Markdown instead of code. Gone is the deep engagement and the depth of craft we are so fluent in: time spent in the corners of codebases, solving puzzles, and uncovering well-kept secrets. Instead, we are to embrace scattered cognition and context switching between a swarm of Agents that are doing our thinking for us. Creative puzzle-solving is left to the machines, and we become mere operators disassociated from our craft.

* * *

Some—more than I imagined—seem to welcome this change, this new identity: “Specification Engineering.” Excited to be an operator and cosplaying as Steve Jobs to “Play the Orchestra”. One could only wonder why they became a programmer in the first place, given their seeming disinterest in coding. Did they confuse Woz with Jobs?

I can’t imagine (though perhaps I’m not very imaginative) that Prompt, Context, or Specification “Engineering”[6](#user-content-fn-6) would lead to a bright and prosperous profession for programmers. It reeks of a devaluation of craft, skill, and labor. A new identity where our unique set of abstract thinking skills isn’t really required; moving us into a realm already occupied by product managers and designers.

Inside companies, power dynamics are shifting as this new identity is pushed. In a mad dash to increase productivity in the wrong place[7](#user-content-fn-7), developers are forced to use LLMs in increasingly specific ways. Conform or be cast out. Use the products that herald our obsolescence, or resign. Scarcely has management mandated such specifics of our tools before. Tools, like those of a chef or carpenter, that we’ve taken great pride in curating and honing ourselves: careful configuration of our editor, tinkering with dot files, and dev environments. As part of the craft, we’ve been dedicated and devoted to personalizing our toolsets to match our thinking. It feels like a violation to have this be decreed by management, who have little to no connection to the day-to-day, and who should instead be concerned with outcomes, process, and facilitating creativity. For decades, programmers have been pampered within companies. These narratives offer a new way for management to tip the balance back in their favor.

* * *

Some—with glee and anticipation—liken LLMs and their impact to the transition from low-level to high-level languages: from Assembly to Fortran. This, I think, is wrong in a couple of ways: firstly, because the leap we made with Fortran was rooted in programming, Fortran didn’t try to eliminate a craft but built on top of it. Fortran didn’t remove the precision and expressibility of programmatic formalisms, but expanded them. Secondly, Fortran was always successful in producing the right outcome given its input. None of these things is true in the world of LLMs. I can practically hear the cultists cry out: “You’re just using it wrong” as they move the goalposts to fit an ever-changing narrative. But we can’t expect AI tools to have the same outcomes as programming languages. They are designed based on a different set of rules and parameters.

There aren’t enough swear words in the English language to adequately describe how frustrating computers and programming can be, but we have at least always been able to count on them for precision: to perform exactly as instructed through programming. It is perhaps because of our reliance and trust in the precision of computers that we seem so primed to believe chatbots when they gaslight us into thinking they did what we asked of them[8](#user-content-fn-8).

LLMs and the work with them are naturally imprecise. Both in the properties of Large Language Models, and in the very manner we instruct them: misinterpretable natural languages. Curious that we chose this approach to computing, given how much we, programmers, cringe at non-determinism. We prefer predictability, compositionality, idempotence, and integration tests that aren’t flaky. LLM code represents the opposite of that: inconsistent chaos.

Dijkstra, in [“On the foolishness of ‘natural language programming’,”](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD06xx/EWD667.html) wrote, rather poignantly: “We have to challenge the assumptions that natural languages would simplify work.” And: “The virtue of formal texts is that their manipulation, in order to be legitimate, need to satisfy only a few simple rules; they are, when you come to think of it, an amazingly effective tool for ruling out all sorts of nonsense that, when we use our native tongues, are almost impossible to avoid.”

* * *

There’s a movement to distance AI-assisted development (Agents in the driver’s seat) from vibe-coding by imposing rigor and bureaucracy, but it ignores the fundamental nature of the beast. I find that I don’t read the code an LLM generates for me as closely as I would if I had written it myself or had reviewed it in a PR. There seems to be something innate to LLM coding that makes my eyes glaze over. I gloss. Overwhelmed and bored. Blindly accepting spiked pitfalls, provided CI passes and the program compiles. Not checking if the tests are even set up to run, or if it pulled in a nonexistent library or implemented a whole one itself. Of course, I pay the price later, when I fall into my own trap and realize that hours of work were built on a broken bedrock. Or maybe I don’t notice till someone calls me out in a pull request, a bug report, or when I’m paged for an incident.

A review or synopsis of a book can never replace the experience of reading it yourself: contemplating ideas for hours and 100s of pages as each sentence is carefully consumed. In the same way, skimming summaries of completed AI tasks robs us of forming a deep understanding of the domain, the problem, and the possible solutions; it robs us of being connected to the codebase. Taking the plunge into the abyss of one’s ignorance to reveal, learn, and understand a topic and its implications is both gratifying and crucial to good software. Ownership, agency, and deep, fulfilling work have been replaced with scattered attention spent between tabs of Agents.

Joan Didion, the great American essayist, famously wrote: [“I write entirely to find out what I’m thinking, what I’m looking at, what I see and what it means.”](https://lithub.com/joan-didion-why-i-write/) Peter Naur explores this same concept in his work, [“Programming as Theory Building.”](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/Naur.pdf) Naur’s “Theory” embodies the understanding of a codebase. How it operates, its formalisms, and its representations of the real world. A context and insight that is only gained from immersion. Naur describes the “Theory” as the primary outcome of programming, the actual product, as opposed to the software it resulted in. Only with a well-developed “Theory” can one effectively apply extensions and bug fixes to codebases. With the ambivalent glances at code that comes with vibing, building such a theory is difficult. Naur would deem it impossible, I’m sure.

Good design emerges from immersion. From steeping. From back-and-forth work in the text buffer and, often, away from the keyboard. It’s impossible to hold a whole codebase in our minds. We must dive into modules, classes, and functions to sharpen our blurry mental models. Read and write code to [extend our cognition](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11119124), regain familiarity, and understanding of the problem domain.

Once a semblance of context has been conjured, and through a plentitude of poor attempts, we can finally uncover the solution. The dissonance of bad design must be felt: it’s only when we write repulsive and repetitive code that we realize that there is a better, more succinct, elegant, compositional, and reusable way. It causes pause. A step back to think about the problem deeply. Start over. Rinse repeat. Diametrically, AI Agent work is frictionless; we avoid alternative solutions and can’t know if what we accept is flawless, mediocre, terrible, or even harmful. Quality is crafted by iteration—how else might we imagine good designs if we never explore objectionable ones?

* * *

The cognitive debt of LLM-laden coding extends beyond disengagement of our craft. We’ve all heard the stories. Hyped up, vibed up, slop-jockeys with attention spans shorter than the framework-hopping JavaScript devs of the early 2010s, sling their sludge in pull requests and design docs, discouraging collaboration and disrupting teams. Code reviewing coworkers are rapidly losing their minds as they come to the crushing realization that they are now the first layer of quality control instead of one of the last. Asked to review; forced to pick apart. Calling out freshly added functions that are never called, hallucinated library additions, and obvious runtime or compilation errors. All while the author—who clearly only skimmed their “own” code—is taking no responsibility, going “whoopsie, Claude wrote that. Silly AI, ha-ha.”

Meddling managers and penny-pinching execs are pushing (hopefully unknowingly) for fewer human interactions on teams. Isolated and bereft of connection, we are now empowered and encouraged to build walls around our work experience. Reaching for LLMs rather than people when we need a pair programmer, someone to ping pong solutions with, prototype, sketch architectures with, or help answer expert questions about esoteric parts of the codebase. We no longer require onboarding buddies, mentors, or peers; instead, we can talk to machines. With LLMs, avoiding human contact is so easy that it might just become the norm. The future really _is_ bright…

* * *

It’s disturbing how agreeable we are to the AI hype narrative and actively participate in the planned erasure of our craft[9](#user-content-fn-9), and so willingly offer up our means of thinking. We were the lucky ones who got to earn a living from our hobbies. Even if we produce punctilious and rigid processes to counter slop—as some support with a striking similarity to the waterfall model of yore—we’ve still outsourced the fun part of the job and replaced it with directorial drudgery. What’s next, TPS reports?

LLMs seem like a nuke-it-from-orbit solution to the complexities of software. Rather than addressing the actual problems, we reached for something far more complex and nebulous to cure the symptoms. I don’t really mind replacing `sed` with Claude or asking it for answers about a library or framework that, after hours of hunting through docs, I still seek clarity on[10](#user-content-fn-10). But I profoundly do not want to be merely an operator or code reviewer: taking a backseat to the fun and interesting work. I want to drive, immerse myself in craft, play _in_ the orchestra, and solve complex puzzles. I want to remain a programmer, a craftsperson.

I prefer my tools to help me with repetitive tasks (and there are many of those in programming), understanding codebases, and authoring correct programs. I take offense at products that are designed to think for me. To remove the agency of my own understanding of the software I produce, and to cut connections with my coworkers. Even if LLMs lived up to the hype, we would still stand to lose all of that and our craft. Humans matter more than machines and their backing corporations, who are profiting while the rest of us chase the new American Dream they sell. As payment, we offer our critical thinking skills, our fun, our craft, our privacy, and perhaps, our planet.

## Footnotes

1.  1 Vim is _my_ editor of choice. We each choose our own. Sublime, Visual Studio Code, JetBrains, etc. Heck, even Emacs. They are all places of magic and creativity. [↩](#user-content-fnref-1)
    
2.  2 [Bram Moolenaar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bram_Moolenaar), the creator and BDFL of [Vim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vim_\(text_editor\)). RIP. [↩](#user-content-fnref-2)
    
3.  3 The [Flexowriter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friden_Flexowriter) was used with several computers to encode programs on perforated [paper tape](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punched_tape), similar to [punch cards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punched_card). [↩](#user-content-fnref-3)
    
4.  4 The [TX-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TX-0), affectionately known as the “Tixo”, was an early, fully transistorized computer designed at the MIT Lincoln Labs. It played a pivotal role in the early computing adventures of pioneering programmers. [↩](#user-content-fnref-4)
    
5.  5 The early Hacker (their own original term) culture at MIT, “The Hacker Ethic,” and “The Right Thing,” are described brilliantly in Steven Levy’s iconic 1984 book [“Hackers: heroes of the computer revolution.”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackers:_Heroes_of_the_Computer_Revolution) [↩](#user-content-fnref-5)
    
6.  6 Calling this engineering or even craft seems like a stretch. In no way a replacement for the depth of craft of programming. [↩](#user-content-fnref-6)
    
7.  7 Programmer productivity is an obsession of executives. Justifiably so, given our cost. Unfortunately, they apply the “number of widgets produced” mentality to knowledge work. They are sold AI snake oil in their circles as magic productivity tools. Tools that promise first to make production more efficient, and secondarily, to eliminate the most expensive part of software companies: software engineers. Us. A win-win for “rise and grind” tech companies. [↩](#user-content-fnref-7)
    
8.  8 I would love to read a study on why people so readily believe and trust in AI chatbots. Is it our learned reliance on computer accuracy, the feigned human mannerisms, or something completely different? When [ELIZA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ELIZA)—arguably the first “AI chatbot”—was released in 1967, it managed to gain the trust of users extremely quickly; people revealed their innermost secrets to it almost immediately. So much so that its creator, Joseph Weizenbaum, wrote a book—[Computer Power and Human Reason](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_Power_and_Human_Reason)—arguing against using computers for critical decision making as they lack a human moral compass. [↩](#user-content-fnref-8)
    
9.  9 There are no tinfoil hats here: the AI companies are positively predicting that programming will become prehistoric. We are literally funding the planned obsolescence of programmers. [↩](#user-content-fnref-9)
    
10.  10 It’s also pretty good at boilerplate code, but isn’t the need for boilerplate code in the first place the real issue? [↩](#user-content-fnref-10)
    

#### Stay up to date

Subscribe via

[RSS](https://hojberg.xyz/rss.xml)

or email

  Subscribe

© 2025 Simon Højberg ❈ Everything on this website—emdash and all—is created by a human ❈

[](https://github.com/hojberg "GitHub @hojberg")[](https://bsky.app/profile/hojberg.xyz "BlueSky @hojberg.xyz")