Computer Science Courses that Don't Exist, But Should

[programming in the  
twenty-first century](/)

It's not about technology for its own sake. It's about being able to implement your ideas.

# Computer Science Courses that Don't Exist, But Should

**CSCI 2100: Unlearning Object-Oriented Programming**  
Discover how to create and use variables that aren't inside of an object hierarchy. Learn about "functions," which are like methods but more generally useful. Prerequisite: Any course that used the term "abstract base class."

**CSCI 3300: Classical Software Studies**  
Discuss and dissect historically significant products, including VisiCalc, AppleWorks, Robot Odyssey, Zork, and MacPaint. Emphases are on user interface and creativity fostered by hardware limitations.

**CSCI 4020: Writing Fast Code in Slow Languages**  
Analyze performance at a high level, writing interpreted Python that matches or beats typical C++ code while being less fragile and more fun to work with.

**CSCI 2170: User Experience of Command Line Tools**  
An introduction to UX principles as applied to command line programs designed as class projects. Core focus is on output relevance, readability, and minimization. UNIX "ls" tool is a case study in excessive command line switches.

**PSYC 4410: Obsessions of the Programmer Mind**  
Identify and understand tangential topics that software developers frequently fixate on: code formatting, taxonomy, type systems, splitting projects into too many files. Includes detailed study of knee-jerk criticism when exposed to unfamiliar systems.

[permalink](210.html) _September 10, 2015_

# previously

*   [If You Haven't Done It Before, All Bets Are Off](209.html)
*   [Why Doesn't Creativity Matter in Tech Recruiting?](208.html)
*   [Reconsidering Functional Programming](207.html)
*   [The Wrong Kind of Paranoia](206.html)
*   [Are You Sure?](205.html)

# [archives](archives.html)

**[twitter](https://twitter.com/dadgumjames)** / **[mail](mailto:james.hague@gmail.com)**

I'm James Hague, a [recovering programmer](56.html) who has been designing video games since the 1980s. [Programming Without Being Obsessed With Programming](195.html) and [Organizational Skills Beat Algorithmic Wizardry](177.html) are good starting points. For the older stuff, try the [2012 Retrospective](162.html).

Where are [the comments](57.html)?