Memory Tagging:  how it improves C/C++ memory safety.
 Compiler perspective.
 Kostya Serebryany, Evgenii Stepanov, Vlad Tsyrklevich  (Google) Oct 2018 From compiler  
   perspective 
1 
Agenda ●ARM v8.5 Memory Tagging Extension 
●Related compiler/optimizer challenges  2 
C & C++ memory safety is a mess ●Use-after-free / buffer-overflow / uninitialized memory 
●> 50% of High/Critical security bugs in Chrome & Android 
●Not only security vulnerabilities ○crashes, data corruption, developer productivity 
●AddressSanitizer (ASAN) is not enough ○Hard to use in production ○Not a security mitigation 3 
ARM Memory Tagging Extension (MTE) ●Announced by ARM on 2018-09-17 
●Doesn’t exist in hardware yet ○Will take several years to appear 
●“Hardware-ASAN on steroids” ○RAM overhead: 3%-5%  ○CPU overhead: (hoping for) low-single-digit %  4 
ARM Memory Tagging Extension (MTE) 
●64-bit only 
●Two types of tags ○Every aligned 16 bytes of memory have a 4-bit tag stored separately ○Every pointer has a 4-bit tag stored in the top byte 
●LD/ST instructions check both tags, raise exception on mismatch  
●New instructions to manipulate the tags 5 
Allocation: tag the memory & the pointer  ●Stack and heap 
●Allocation: ○Align allocations by 16 ○Choose a 4-bit tag (random is ok) ○Tag the pointer  ○Tag the memory (optionally initialize it at no extra cost) 
●Deallocation: ○Re-tag the memory with a different tag 6 
Heap-buffer-overflow char *p = new char[20]; // 0xa007fffffff1240 
 -32:-17 -16:-10:1516:3132:4748:64 7 
Heap-buffer-overflow char *p = new char[20]; // 0xa007fffffff1240 
p[32] = ... // heap-buffer-overflow ⬛ ≠ ⬛ 
-32:-17 -16:-10:1516:3132:4748:64 8 
Heap-use-after-free char *p = new char[20]; // 0xa007fffffff1240 
 -32:-17 -16:-10:1516:3132:4748:64 9 
Heap-use-after-free 
char *p = new char[20]; // 0xa007fffffff1240 
delete [] p;  // Memory is retagged ⬛ ⇒ ⬛  
p[0] = ...  // heap-use-after-free ⬛ ≠ ⬛ -32:-17 -16:-10:1516:3132:4748:64 -32:-17 -16:-10:1516:3132:4748:64 10 
Probabilities of bug detection int *p = new char[20]; p[20]             // undetected (same granule) p[32], p[-1]      // 93%-100% (15/16 or 1) p[100500]         // 93% (15/16) delete [] p; p[0] // 93% (15/16) 11 
BTW: other existing implementations ●SPARC ADI ○Exists in real hardware since ~2016 (SPARC M7/M8 CPUs) ○4-bit tags per 64-bytes of memory ○Great, but high RAM overhead due to 64-byte alignment  
●LLVM HWASAN ○Software implementation similar to ASAN (LLVM ToT)  ○8-bit tags per 16-bytes of memory ○AArch64-only (uses top-byte-ignore) ○Overhead: 6% RAM, 2x CPU, 2x code size 12 
New MTE instructions (docs, LLVM patch) IRG Xd, Xn Copy Xn into Xd, insert a random 4-bit tag into Xd ADDG Xd, Xn, #<immA>, #<immB> Xd := Xn + #immA, with address tag modified by #immB.
STG [Xn], #<imm> Set the memory tag of [Xn] to the tag(Xn) STGP Xa, Xb, [Xn], #<imm> Store 16 bytes from Xa/Xb to [Xn] and set the memory tag of [Xn] to the tag(Xn) 
bit manipulations with the address tag  storing the memory tag 13 
Relax and wait for the hardware?
14 
No, compiler writers need to reduce the overhead 15 
MTE overhead ●Extra logic inside LD/ST (fetching the memory tag) ○Software can’t do much to improve it (???) 
●Tagging heap objects ○CPU: malloc/free become O(size) operations 
●Tagging stack objects (optional, but desirable)  ○CPU: function prologue becomes O(frame size) ○Stack size: local variables aligned by 16 ○Code size: extra instructions per function entry/exit ○Register pressure: local variables have unique tags, not as simple as [SP, #offset] 
16 
Compiler-optimizations for MTE 17 
Malloc zero-fill (1) struct S { int64_t a, b; }; S *foo() { return new S{0, 0}; } 
 bl_Znwm                     stpxzr, xzr, [x0]           bl_Znwm                     
18 
Malloc zero-fill (2) struct S { int64_t a, b; }; S *foo() { return new S{1, 2}; } 
 (*) Generated by GCC. LLVM produces worse code. BUG 39170 bl _Znwm    mov x3, 1     // (*) mov x2, 2 stp x3, x2, [x0] bl _Znwm_no_tag_memory    mov x3, 1     mov x2, 2 stgp x3, x2, [x0] 19 
Malloc to stack conversion (see Hal’s talk) ●By itself makes things worse ○Still need to tag memory, but adds code bloat   ●Beneficial if tagging can be completely avoided ○(heap-to-stack-to-registers) 
●Could be combined with stack safety analysis (???) 20 
Simple stack instrumentation void foo() {   int a;   bar(&a); }
...
sub sp, sp, #16 irg x0, sp   // Copy sp to x0 and insert a random tag stg [x0]     // Tag memory with x0’s tag blbar        stg [sp], #16 // Before exit, restore the default 
...
 21 
Rematerializable stack pointers void foo() {   int a, b, c; ...
  bar(&a); bar(&b); bar(&c); } 
irg x19, sp  // “base” pointer with random tag
...
addg x0, x19, #16, #1 // address-of-a with semi-random tag bl bar  addg x0, x19, #32, #2 // address-of-b with semi-random tag bl bar 
22 
Store-and-tag void foo() {   int a = 42;   bar(&a); } 
irg x0, sp mov w8, #42 stgp x8, xzr, [x0]   // store pair and tag memory bl bar 23 
Unchecked loads and stores int foo() {   int a;   bar(&a);   return a; } 
irg x0, sp stg [x0] bl bar         // clobbers X0, but that’s OK ...  ldr w0, [sp]   // SP-based LD/ST do not check tags! (#imm offset) 24 
Static stack safety analysis ●Do we need to tag an address-taken local variable?
○Is buffer overflow possible?  ○Is use-after-return possible?  ○(Optional): is use of uninitialized value possible?  
●Intra-procedural analysis is unlikely to help much 
●Inter-procedural analysis: ○Context-insensitive offset range and escape analysis for pointers in function arguments.
○~25% local variables (by count) proven safe; up to 60% with (Thin)LTO.
○Patches are coming! (first one: https://reviews.llvm.org/D53336) 25 
Challenge: how to test the stack safety analysis?
●Unittests for sure, but never enough 
●We remove the checks that fire extremely rare, no good test suite ○Similar problem is e.g. for bounds check removal in Java 
●Use analysis in ASAN but do not eliminate the checks: report bugs in a  special way and notify developers (us) 26 
More optimizations for MTE?
●Will these optimizations be useful for something else?
 ●What other optimizations are possible?
 ●Can we reuse/repurpose any existing optimizations?
 27 
More uses for MTE?  ●Infinite Watchpoints?
  ●Race Detection (like in DataCollider)?
 ●Type Confusion Sanitizer? (for non-polymorphic types)  
●Garbage Collection?
 ●???
28 
Summary ●ARM MTE makes C++ memory-safer 
●Small, but non-zero overhead 
●Compilers must reduce the overhead 
●ALSO: Please ask your CPU vendor to implement MTE 29