An Efficient Implementation of SELF,  a Dynamically-Typed Object-Oriented Language  Based on Prototypes*  Craig Chambers, David Ungar, and  Elgin Lee  Center for Integrated Systems, Stanford University  sel@@self.stanford.edu  Abstract  1. Introduction  We have developed and implemented techniques that  double the performance of dynamically-typed object-  oriented languages.  Our SELF implementation runs  twice as fast as the fastest Smalltalk implementation,  &spite SELF’s lack of classes and explicit variables.  To compensate for the absence of classes, our system  uses implementation-level maps to transparently group  objects cloned from the same prototype, providing data  type information and eliminating the apparent space  overhead for prototype-based systems. To compensate  for dynamic typing, userdefined conml structures, and  the lack of explicit variables, our system dynamically  compiles multiple versions of a source method, each  customized according to its receiver’s map. Within each  version the type of the receiver is fixed, and thus the  compiler can statically bind and inline all messages sent  to self. Message splitting and type prediction  extract  and preserve even more static type information,  allowing the compiler to inline many other messages.  Inlining dramatically improves performance and  eliminates the need to hard-wire low-level methods  such as +, ==, and if  True : .  SELF yUS87] is a dynamically-typed object-oriented  language inspired by the Smalltalk-80** language  [GR83]. Like Smalltalk, SELF has no type declarations,  allowing programmers to rapidly build and modify  systems without interfenznce from out-of-date type  declarations. Also, SELF provides blocks (lexically-  scoped function objects akin to closures [Ste76, SS76])  so that SELF programmers may define their own  control structures; even the standard control structures  for iteration and boolean selection are constructed out  of blocks. However, unlike Smalltalk and most other  object-oriented languages, SELF has no classes.***  Instead it is based on the prototype object model, in  which each object defines its own object-specific  behavior, and inherits shared behavior from its parent  objects. Also unlike Smalltalk, SELF accesses state  solely by sending messages; there is no special syntax  for accessing a variable or changing its value. These two  features, combined with SELF’s multiple inheritance  rules, help keep programs concise, malleable, and  reusable.  Despite inlining and other optimizations, our system  still supports interactive programming environments.  The system traverses internal dependency lists to  invalidate all compiled methods affected by a program-  ming change. The debugger reconstructs inlined stack  frames from compiler-generated debugging information,  making inlining invisible to the SELF programmer.  Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided  that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage,  the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear,  and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for  Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee  and/or specific permission.  0 1989 ACM 08979L333-7/89/0010/0049 $1.50  In a straightforward implementation, SELF’s prototype-  based model would consume much more storage space  other dynamically-typed  object-oriented  programming languages, and its reliance on message  * ‘Ibis work has been generously supported by a National  Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator Grant #  CCR-865’7631, and by IBM, Texas Instruments, NCR, Tandem  Computers, Apple Computer, and Sun Microsystems.  *If Smalltalk- is a trademark of ParcPlace Systems, Inc.  Hereafter when we write “Smalltalk” we will. be referring to the  Sma.lltalk-80 system or language.  *** To illustrate how unusual this is, note that some well-  respected authorities have gone so far as to require that “object-  oriented” languages provide classes meg87]. Other prototype  models are discussed in por86, Lie86, LTP86, Ste87].  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  49  
passing to access state would exact an even higher  penalty in execution time. We have developed and  implemented techniques that eliminate the space and  time costs of these features. In addition, we have  implemented other optimizations that enable SELF to  nm twice as fast as the fastest Smalltalk system. These  same techniques could improve implementations of  class-based object-oriented languages such as Smalltalk,  Flavors Fzoo86], CLOS [Bob88], C++ [Str86],  TreIlis/Owl [Sch86], and Eiffel [Mey86].  This paper describes our implementation for SELF,  which has been running for over a year. First we review  SELF’s object and execution model in section 2. Then  we describe SELF’S object storage system in section 3,  introducing mups and segregation and presenting object  formats.  Section 4  explains our  byte-coded  representation for source code. Section 5 reviews the  compiler techniques, originally published in fCU89].  Section  6 explains how these optimizations can coexist  with an exploratory programming environment that  supports incremental recompilation and source-level  debugging. Section 7 compares the performance of SELF  to the fastest available Smalltalk system and an  optimizing C compiler. It also proposes a new  petiOltllliUCe metric,  MlMS, for object-oriented  language implementations.  We conclude with a  discussion of open issues and future work.  2. Overview of SELF  SELF was initially designed by the second author and  Randall B. Smith at Xerox PARC. The subsequent  design evolution and implementation were undertaken  beginning in mid-1987 by the authors at Stanford  University.  SELF objects consist of named slots, each of which  contains a reference to some other object. Some slots  may be designated as parent slots (by appending  asterisks to their names). Objects may also have SELF  source code associated with them, in which case the  object is called  a method (similar to a procedure). To  make a new object in SELF, an existing object (called  the prototype) is simply cloned (shallow-copied).  When a message is sent to an object (called the receiver  of the message), the object is searched for a slot with  the same name as the message. If a matching slot is not  found, then the contents of the object’s parent slots are  searched recursively, using SELF’s multiple inheritance  rules to disambiguate any duplicate matching slots.  general traits  point traits  parent’  mint  t  1.  x print. ‘, ’ print. y print  cartesian point traits  T  a  Six SELF objects. The bottom  objects are two-dimensional  Ialar point traits  point objects, the left one using cartesian coordinates and  the right one using polar coordinates. The t represents  the assignment primitive operation, which is invoked to  modify the contents of corresponding data slots. The carte-  Sian point traits object is the immediate parent object  shared by all Cartesian point objects, and defines four meth-  ods for interpreting Cartesian points in terms of polar coor-  dinates; the polar point traits object does the same for po-  lar point objects. The point traits object is a shared ances-  tor of all point objects, and defines general methods for  printing and adding points, regardless of coordinate sys-  tem. This object inherits from the top object, which defines  even more general behavior, such as how to copy objects.  Once a matching slot is found, its contents is evuluuted  and the result is returned as the result of the message  send.  An object without code evaluates to itself (and so the  slot holding it acts like a variable). An object with  code (a method) is a prototype activation record. When  evaluated, the method object clones itself, iills in its  self slot with the receiver of the message, fills in its  argument slots (if any) with the arguments of the  message, and executes its code. The self slot is a parent  slot so that the cloned activation record inherits from  the receiver of the message send.  For instance, in the point example shown above, sending  the x message to the cartesian point object finds the x  slot immediately. The contents of the slot is the integer  3, which evaluates to itself (it has no associated code),  producing 3 as the result of the x message. If x were  50  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October l-6, 1989  
sent to the polar point object, however, x wouldn’t be  found immediately. The object’s parents would be  searched, finding the x slot defined in the polar point  traits object. That x slot contains a method that  computes the x coordinate from the  rho and theta  coordinates. The method would get cloned and executed,  producing the floating point result  1.2 5.  If the  print message were sent to a point object, the  print slot defined in the point traits object would be  found. The method contained in the slot prints out the  point object in Cartesian coordinates. If the point were  represented using Cartesian coordinates, the x and y  messages would access the corresponding data slots of  the point object. But the print method works fine  even for points represented using polar coordinates: the  x and y messages would find the conversion methods  defined in the polar point traits object to compute the  correct x and y values.  SELF supports assignments to data slots by associating  an assignment  slot with each assignable data slot. The  assignment slot contains the assignment primitive  object. When the assignment primitive is evaluated as  the result of a message send, it stores its argument into  the associated data slot. A data slot with no  corresponding assignment slot is called a constant or  read-only slot, since a running program cannot change  its value. For example, most parent slots are constant  slots. However, our object model allows a parent slot  to be assignable just like any other slot, simply by  defining its corresponding assignment slot. Such an  assignable parent slot permits an object’s inheritance to  change on-the-fly, perhaps as a result of a change in the  object’s state. For example, a collection object may  wish to provide  different behavior depending on  whether the collection is empty or not. This dynamic  inheritance is one of SELF’s linguistic innovations, and  has proven to be a useful addition to the set of object-  oriented programming techniques.  SELF allows programmers to define their own control  structures using blocks. A block contains a method in a  slot named  value; this method is special in that when  it is invoked (by sending value to the block), the  method runs as a child of its lexically enclosing  activation record (either a “normal” method activation  or another block method activation). The self slot is not  rebound when invoking a block method, but instead is  inherited from the IexicaIly enclosing method. Block  methods may be terminated with a non-local return  expression, which retums a value not to the caller of  the block method, but to the caller of the lexically-  enclosing non-block method, much like a  return  statement in C.  Two other kinds of objects appear in SELF: object arrays  and byte arrays. Arrays contain only a single parent slot  pointing to the parent object for that kind of array, but  contain a variable number of element objects. As their  names suggest, object arrays contain elements that are  arbitrary objects, while byte arrays contain only integer  objects in the range 0 to 255, but in a more compact  form. Primitive operations support fetching and storing  elements of arrays as well as determining the size of an  array and cloning a new array of a particular size.  The SELF language described here is both simple and  powerful, but resists efficient implementation. SELF’S  prototype object model, in which each object can have  unique format and behavior, poses serious challenges for  the economical storage of objects. SELF’s exclusion of  type declarations and commitment to message passing  for all computation-even for control structures and  variable accesses4efeats existing compiler technology.  The remainder of this paper describes our responses to  these challenges.  3. The Object Storage System  The object storage system (also referred to as the  memory system) must represent the objects of the SELF  user’s world, including references between objects. It  crates new objects and reclaims the resources consumed  by inaccessible objects. An ideal memory system would  squeeze as many objects into as little memory as  possible, for high performance at low cost. An earlier  version of our SELF memory system was documented in  [Lee88].  Much of our memory system design exploits  technology proven in existing high-performance  SmaIltalk systems. For minimal overhead in the  common case,  our SELF system represents object  references using direct tagged pointers, rather than  indirectly through an object table. Allocation and  garbage collection in our SELF system uses Generation  Scavenging with demographic feedback-mediated  tenuring [Ung86, UJ88], augmented with a traditional  mark-and-sweep collector to reclaim tenured garbage.  The following two subsections describe our new  techniques for efficient object storage systems; the third  subsection describes our object formats in detail.  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  51  
3.1. Maps  A naive implementation of SELF’s prototype object  model would waste space. If SELF were based on  classes, the class objects would contain the format  (names and locations of the instance variables),  methods, and superclass information for all their  instances; the instances would contain only the values  of their instance variables and a pointer to the shared  class object. Since SELF uses the prototype model, each  object must define its own format, behavior, and  inheritance, and presumably an implementation would  have to represent both the class-like format, method,  and inheritance information and the instance-like state  information in every SELF object.  Luckily, we can regain the storage efficiency of classes  even in SELF’s prototype object model. Few SELF  objects have totally unique format and behavior.  Almost all objects are created by cloning some other  object and then modifying the values of the assignable  slots. Wholesale changes in the format or inheritance of  an object, such as those induced by the programmer, can  only be accomplished by invoking special primitives.  We say that a prototype and the objects cloned from it,  identical in every way except for the values of their  assignable slots, form a  clone family.  We have invented maps as an implementation technique  to efficiently represent members of a clone family. In  our SELF  object storage system, objects are represented  by the values of their assignable slots, if any, and a  pointer to the object’s map; the map is shared by all  members of the same clone family. For each slot in the  object, the map contains the name of the slot, whether  the slot is a parent slot, and either the offset within the  object of the slot’s contents (if it’s an assignable slot)  or the slot’s contents itself (if it’s a constant slot, such  as a non-assignable parent slot). If the object has code  (i.e., is a method), the map stores a pointer to a SELF  byte code object representing the source code of the  method (byte code objects are described in section 4).  Maps are immutable so that they may he freely shared  by objects in the same clone family. However, when the  user changes the format of an object or the value of one  of an object’s constant slots, the map no longer applies  to the object. In this case, a new map is created for the  changed object, starting a new clone family. The old  map still applies to any other members of the originaI  clone family.  Without Maps  Cartesian point traits  two cartesian points  With Maps  ia  cartesian point traits map  cartesian point traits  two cartesian points  ii  cartesian point map  An example of the representations for two Cartesian  points and their parent. Without maps, each slot would  require at least two words: one for its name and another  for its contents. This means that each point would  CCCU-  py at least 10 words. With maps, each point object only  needs to store the contents of its assignable slots, plus  one more word to point to the map. All constant slots and  all format information are factored out into the map.  Maps reduce the 10 words per point to 3 words. Since  the cartesian point traits object has no assignable slots,  all of its data are kept in its map.  From the implementation point of view, maps look  much like classes, and achieve the same sorts of space  savings for shared data But maps are totally  transparent at the SELF language level, simplifying the  language and increasing expressive power by allowing  objects to change their formats at will. In addition, the  map of an object conveys its static properties to the  SELF compiler, Section 5 explains how the compiler can  exploit this information to optimize SELF code.  52  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October l-6, 1989  
3.2. Segregation  A common operation of the memory system is to scan  all object references for those that meet some criterion: 
. 
. 
.  To  The scavenger scans all objects for references to  objects in from-space.  The reflective object modification and programming  primitives have to redirect all references to an  object if its size changes and it has to be moved.  The browser may want to scan all objects for those  that contain a reference to a particular object that  interests the SELF user.  support these and other functions, our SELF  implementation has been designed for rapid scanning of  object references.  Since the elements of byte arrays are represented using  packed bytes rather than tagged words, byte array  elements  may  masquerade as object references.  Smalltalk systems typically handle this problem by  scanning the heap object-by-object rather than word-by-  word. For each object, the system checks to see whether  the object contains object references or only bytes. Only  if the object contains object references does the system  scan the object for matching references, iterating up to  the length of the object. Then the scanner proceeds to  the next object. This procedure avoids the problems  caused by scanning byte arrays, but slows down the scan  with the overhead to parse object headers and compute  object lengths.  In our SELF system, we avoid the problems associated  with scanning byte arrays without degrading the object  reference scamring speed by  segregating the byte arrays  from the other SELF objects. Each Generation  Scavenging memory space is divided into two areas, one  for byte arrays and one for objects with references. To  scan all object references, only the object reference ama  of each space needs to be scanned. This optimization  speeds scans in two ways: byte array objects are never  scanned, and object headers are never parsed.  To avoid slowing the tight scanning loop with an  explicit end-of-space check, the word after the end of  the space is temporarily replaced with a  sentinel  reference that matches the scanning criterion. The  scanner checks for the end of the space only on a  matching reference, instead of on every word. Early  measurements on 68020-based Sun-3/50’s showed that  f 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.. ,. ,... . . . . . . . . . . / . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . ., . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
.-:. :.:.:.:.:.:.:. :.:.:. :.:.:.:.:y:.:. :.:.:.: :.:.:.:.:.:i .,.......; _.,.,................... 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . :.:.:.:.: ._.........._...._............,......,.,...,.,.......... ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,,~~~~~: 
.““““““““““”  “.“‘.‘.‘.‘.‘.’  ~~...~~~..~.~,............~.....~.........~.......... . .  ‘.‘...‘:‘:‘:‘.‘.‘.:...:.~.:.: ._.,.....,.....,...j,. . . . . .._.................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._..............................................:.,...,.,.,...,,,,,.,.,.,.,,,,,.,.,.,.,., 
..~..............._................~...~.~.~,.,.,., . . . . . _.....,.,.,,,.,.,.,,,,,.,.,.,.,,,,,.,.,.,,,.,  ‘.‘.‘,L’.‘. ‘.‘A.‘. 0. ...A . . . . . . . . ,,.,,_  ::::::::::::::::.:.:.:.x+:+:.:.: .,..., . . . . . .A.... ‘.:,~:.~:.~:.:.~~:.:.:.:.~~~~~~~~~:.~  ‘.,““.‘.‘.‘.‘.‘.‘...,.,.,.,.,.,.,...,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,,,,,,,,,,.,,,~,~,~,~~~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~, : ,:,:,:,:,:  ‘.‘.‘.‘.‘.‘.‘.‘.  “““.‘.‘.‘.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.~.:.,.....,............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.;.:.:.:.:.:..:.:.:.:.:.: ,....i.,..,._..,,~_~.~.~.~,~.~,~,~.~.~,~,  ijiijjjjljjiijiiiiii~~~~~~~:~ . .  “‘j”..‘..... .,.,.,.,...,.,.,.,.,.,.,...,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,...,...,.....,.,......,.~...,.,...,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,...,.,. ,.,.,.,.,._.. .,.,,,  I:_:; ,...:.:.:.:. :.;.:.I....,  j’i:j’j:i’i:j:j:j:j::::::::::  &j ect reference area grows upward ; ~~~ii~~i’ij~~  :.:.:.:.:.:.:.:((.:.:.:.:.:  ~ contains all object references but  :#:::::::::::::::::::::::::::  fj~~$##$$$ no confusing byte arrays  i..‘.,.‘.‘.:,:.:.:::::::::::::  ::::::::::::.:.:.: .,.,.,.,.,._.  ~.....~.~...~....1_~.........~ 
.~:~:~.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:,:.:.:  ,_,.( .,.,.,,  i:+ ._.. >:.:.: . . . ~~~:.: 
.,.v., .,,,.,  :::::::::::::::::::::::::::: .,.,.,.,. >A.? .A..... < .:.:,:+:.) :_> :.:+:+:. > :.:.:.:. >::>>>>:::.:.:.:.:.: . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._.................................... ~,~~:,~ ,.,‘,‘,.,‘~~,:(  ‘f:‘:‘::::: 
. . . . . . ,.. _. ,.. ,....,_.. ;:)I::::::::::::.:.:.:.:.:.:.:  “‘.‘.‘...‘.‘.‘.‘I.‘.‘...‘.:.:.:.:......,.... A.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._L.......... :.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.~::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::~:::~:::~::: :::::::::::,:,:,:,:,:.:,:,:,:,:,:,:,:.,  : :::: : :: :: 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,.,.,.,...,.,.,.,.,.,.,...,  :, 
.“““““.‘(.....,...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~......._....._.............._.~.................  _, 
.,.(.,.,.(.(.(.,., .,.,...,.,.,... ..,., .,.,.,.,...,.,. ,.,.,.,.,.,., ,.,.,., . . .: :: ::: ::: :::  :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::‘:‘:’:’:’:’:’:’:’:::::::.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.~.:.: . . . . . :.:.:.:.:.:.:.~:.:.:.:.:.:.:.‘.:.:.~:.:.~.~:.’.:::: :: : : :: : : :.,, .,.,...,.....,.,.,.,...,.,  ,,,,,, ,,_  A SELF Memory Space  our SELF system scanned memory at the rate of  approximately 3 megabytes per second. Measurements  of the fastest Smalltalk- implementation on the same  machine indicated a scanning speed for non-segregated  memory spaces of only 1.6 megabytes per second.  For some kinds of scans, such as finding all objects that  refer to a particular object, the scanner needs to find the  objects that contain a matching reference, rather than  the reference itself. Our system can perform these types  of searches nearly as fast as a normal scan. We use a  special tag for the first header word of every object  (called the  murk word) to identify the beginning of the  object. The scanner proceeds normally, searching for  matching references. Once a reference is found, the  object containing the reference can be found by simply  scanning backwards to the object’s mark word, and then  converting the mark’s address into an object reference.  3.3. Object Formats  A SELF memory space is organized as a linear array of  aligned 32-bit words. Each word contains a low-order 2-  bit tag field, used to interpret the remaining 30 bits of  information. A reference to an integer or floating point  number encodes the number directly in the reference  itself. Converting between a tagged integer immediate  and its corresponding hardware representation requires  only a shift instruction. Adding, subtracting, and  comparing tagged integers require no conversion at all.  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  53  
31  30-bit signed integer  2 0  I  00  integer immediate (or virtual machine address)  31 2 0  I  I  top 30 bits of word-aligned address  01  reference to SELF heap object  I  I  30 bits of IEEE floating point number  I 10  floating point immediate (or v. m. address)  31  2 0  I  scavenging fields and hash field 
. 11  mark header word (begins SELF heap object)  References to other SELF objects and references to map  objects embed the address of the object in the reference  (remember that there is no object table). The remaining  tag format is used to mark the Crst header word of each  object, as required by the scanning scheme discussed in  the previous subsection. Pointers to virtual machine  functions and other objects not in the SELF heap are  represented using raw machine addresses; since their  addresses are at least 16-bit half-word aligned the  scavenger will interpret them as immediates and won’t  try to relocate them.  object w/ slots object array byte array  Each object begins with two header words. The first  word is the mark word, marking the beginning of the  object. The mark contains several bitfields used by the  scavenger and an immutable bitfield used by the SELF  hash primitive. The second word is a tagged reference  to the object’s map. A SELF object with assignable  slots contains additional words to represent their  contents. An array object contains its length (tagged as  a SELF integer to prevent interactions with scavenging  and scanning) and its elements (either 32-bit tagged  object references or 8-bit untagged bytes, padded out to  the nearest 32-bit boundary).  The representation of a map is similar. Map objects  begin with mark and map words. AU map objects share  the same map, called the “map map.” The map map is  its own map. All maps in new-space are linked together  by their third words; after a scavenge the system  traverses this list to finalize inaccessible maps. The  fourth word of  a map contains the virtual machine  address of an array of function pointers;* these  functions perform format-dependent operations on  objects or their maps.  For maps of objects with slots, the fifth word specifies  the size of the object in words. The sixth word  indicates the number of slots in the object. The next  two words contain a change dependency link for the  map, described in section 6.1. These four words are  tagged as integers. If the map is for a method, the ninth  word references the byte code object representing the  method’s source code.  map for  a data object  fTii%J  El  I  dwqgpcy  I 
.  I  dot  description  I  map for  a method  map for  an array  1 byte code ]  1 des%$on /  I  I  : 
.  / de.s%$ion 1  * This function pointer array is exactly the virtual function array  generated by the C++ compiler.  54  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October i-6, 1989  
Finally, the map includes a five-word description for  each of the object’s slots. The first word points to the  SELF string object representing the name of the slot;  the next word describes both the type of the slot  (either constant data slot, assignable data slot, or  assignment slot) and whether the slot is a parent slot.*  The thid word of a slot description contains either the  contents of the slot (if it’s a constant slot), the offset  within the object of the contents of the slot (if it’s au  assignable data slot), or the index of the corresponding  data slot (if it’s an assignment slot). The last two  words of each slot contain a change dependency link for  that slot, described in section 6.1.  constant slot  description  data slot  description  assignment slot  description  slot contents  1 slot offset 1 Idata slot index1  From the above object formats, we can determine that  the total space cost to represent a clone family of n  objects (each with s slots, (I of which are assignable) is  (2 + a)n + 5s + 8 words. For the simple Cartesian point  example, s is 5 (x, x: , y. y:, and parent) and u is 2  (x and y), leading to a total space cost to represent all  point objects of 4n + 33 words. Published accounts of  Smalltalk- systems [DS84, Ung86] indicate that these  systems use at least two extra words per object: one for  its class pointer and another for either its address or its  hash code and flags. Therefore, maps allow objects in a  prototype-based system like SELF to be represented just  as space-efficiently as objects in a class-based system  like Smalltalk.  * In SELF parents are prioritized; the priority of a parent slot is  stored in the second word of the slot description.  slot contenfs  liil  3 i  slot contents 4  i 
. . . . . . . :  map i  slot contents 7.5 i  B  slot contents -24 : 
. . . c 
. . .  map map 
. . . 
. . .  4  5 
. . .  ‘parent  const. parent slo  cart. point traits 
. . .  ‘X’  data slot  2 
. . *  3 3  Y  data slot  3 
. . .  ‘x:’  assignment slot  1 
. . .  ‘y:’  assignment slot  2 
. . .  mark  map  scav’ing link  function array  object length  slot count  map  f;rdew  slot name  slot type  slot contents  slot  ;; dew  R”  slot name  slot type  slot offset  slot  hfe  de ndency  slot name  slot type  slot offset  slot  j?; dew  r  slot name  slot type  data slot index  slot  ;; dew  r  s/of name  slot type  dafa slot index  slot  de ndency  /inRe  The representation of two carte&n point objects. The  objects on the left are the point “instances,” containing  the values of the x and y assignable data slots. The  right object is the shared map for all Cartesian points,  containing the value of the constant parent slot and the  offsets of the assignable x and y slots.  October I-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  55  
4. The Parser  To minimize parsing overhead, textual SELF programs  are parsed once when entered into the system, generating  SELF-level byte code objects, much like Smalltalk  CompiledMethod instances. Each method object  represents its source code by storing a reference to the  pre-parsed byte code object in the method’s map; all  cloned invocations of the method thus share the same  byte code object. A byte code object contains a byte  array holding the byte codes for the source, and an  object array holding the message names and object  literals used in the source. Each byte code in the byte  array represents a single byte-sized virtual machine  instruction, and is divided into two parts: a 3-bit  opcode and a 5-bit object array index. The opcodes am  specified as if for execution by a stack-oriented  interpreter, in actuality, our SELF compiler  dynamically translates byte code objects into native  machine instructions just prior to execution The only  opcodes used to represent SELF programs are the  following:  SELF  push aelf onto the execution stack  LITERAL cvaiue index>  push a literal value onto the execution stack  SEND <message name index>  send a message, popping the receiver and arguments off  the execution stack and pushing the result  SELF SEND <message name index>  send a message to self, popping the arguments off the  execution stack and pushing the result  SUPER SEND <message name index>  send a message to self, delegated to all parents,  popping the arguments off the execution stack and  pushing the result  DELEGATEE <parent name index>  delegate the next message send to the named parent  NON-LOCAL RETURN  execute a non-local return from the lexically-enclosing  method activation  INDEX-EXTENSION <index extension>  extend the next index by prepending the index  extension  The index for the opcodes is an index into the  accompanying object array. The 5-bit offset allows the  ftrst 32 message names and literals to be referred to  directly; indices larger than 32 are constructed using  extra INDEX-EXTENSION instmctions.  In SELF source code, primitive operations are invoked  with the same syntax used to send a message, except  that the message name begins with an underscore (“-“).  method object  (prototype activation record)  SELF SEND #I0 (x)  SEND #l (prin?)  LITERAL #2 (: ‘)  SEND #l (print)  SELF SEND #3 (y)  SEND #l {print)  The representation of the point print method. The top ob-  ject is the prototype activation record, containing place-  holders for the local slots of the method (in this case, just  the self slot) plus a reference to the byte code object rep-  resenting the source code (actually stored in the method’s  map). The byte code object contains a byte array for the  byte codes themselves, and a separate object array for the  constants and message names used in the source code.  Every call of a primitive operation may optionally pass  in a block to be invoked if the primitive fails by  appending IfFail: to the message name. If invoked,  the block is passed an error code identifying the nature  of the failure (e.g. overflow, divide by zero, or  incorrect argument type). The normal SEND byte codes  are used to  represent all primitive operation  invocations, simplifying the byte codes and facilitating  extensions to the set of available primitive operations.  By contrast, SmalltaIk-80 primitives are invoked by  number rather than name, and may only be called at the  beginning of a method. The rest of the method is  executed if the primitive fails, without any indication  of why the primitive failed.  The byte codes needed to express SELF programs fall  into only three classes: base values (LITERAL and  SELF), message sends, and non-local return. This small  number results from both the simplicity and elegance of  the SELF language and the lack of elaborate space-saving  encodings. Smalltalk- defines a much larger set of  byte codes [GR83], tuned to minimize space and  56  OOPSLA ‘89  Proceedings  October 1-6, 1989  
maximize interpretation speed, and includes byte codes  to fetch and store local, instance, class, pool, and  global variables and shortcut byte codes for common-  case operations such as loading constants like nil,  true. and 0.  Smalltalk- systems also use special control flow  byte codes to implement common boolean messages Iike  ifTrue:ifFalse: and whilelrue:; the Smalltalk  parser translates the message sends into conditional and  unconditional branch byte codes, open-coding the  argument blocks. Similarly, the == message is  automatically translated into the identity comparison  primitive operation byte code. A similar optimization is  included for messages like + and <, which the parser  translates into special byte codes. When executed, these  byte codes either directly invoke the corresponding  integer primitive operation (if the receiver is an  integer), or perform the message send (if the receiver  isn’t an integer).  Although this special processing for common messages  may significantly improve the performance of existing  Smalltalk systems,  especially interpreted ones, they  violate the extensible and flexible spirit of Smalltalk:  l The source code for the  relegated to documentation,  hard-wired source code are  hY  definitions of  whileTrue:, and == for  are ignored.  hard-wired methods is  and all changes to the  ignored by the system.  ifTrue:ifFalse:,  other types of objects  l The receiver of an ifTrue:ifFalse: message  must evaluate to either the true or the false object  at run-time and the arguments must be block  literals at parse-time; the receiver and argument to  whileTrue: must be block literals at parse-time,  and the receiver block must evaluate to either the  true or the false object at run-time.  l Perhaps the worst aspect of these parser  “optimizations” is that they tempt programmers to  select inappropriate  control  structures like  whileTrue: instead of  to : do : to obtain the  performance of the hard-wired message.  In effect, these hard-wired messages have become the  non-object-oriented built-in operators of Smalltalk.  Our SELF system incorporates none of these tricks.  Instead our compilation techniques achieve better  performance without compromising the language’s  conceptual simplicity and elegance, preserving the  message passing model for all messages.  5. The Compiler  The SELF compiler is a significant part of our efficient  implementation [CU89]. It is similar to the Deutsch-  Schiffman translator described in [DS84] (and  implemented in the PamPlace Smalltalk- system) in  that it supports dynamic translation of byte-coded  methods into machine code transparently on demand at  run-time, and it uses an inline caching technique to  reduce the cost of non-polymorphic message sends.  However, although the Deutsch-Schiffman system is the  fastest Smalltalk system (as of July 1989), it still runs  about 10 times slower than optimized C. By combining  traditional optimizing compiler technology, techniques  from high-performance Smalltalk systems, and some  critical new techniques we developed,  our SELF  compiler has already achieved a level of performance  more than twice as fast as the Deutsch-Schiffman  system, and only 4 to 5 times slower than optimized C.  We hope that our second-generation system under  construction (and described in section 7) will achieve  even better levels of performance.  The main obstacle to generating efficient code from  Smalltalk programs, as many people have noted before  [Atk86, JGZ88, BMW86], is that very little static type  information is available in the Smalltalk source. Only  literal constants have a known class at compile-time;  without detailed analysis, no other types are known.  Type infemncing is difficult for Smalltalk programs,  especially when the compiler is using the inferred types  to improve performance [Suz81, BI82, Cur89]. Even if  the Smalltalk programmer were willing to sacrifice  many of the benefits of his exploratory programming  environment and annotate his programs with static tyPe  declarations, designing an adequate type system for  Smalltalk would be hard [Atk86, JGZ88]; the more  flexible the type system, the smaller the performance  improvement possible and the smaller the reward for  including type declarations in the first place.  SELF programs are even hauler to compile efficiently  than Smalltalk programs. All the problems of missing  static type information that Smalltalk compilers face  are also faced by our SELF compiler. In addition, all  variables in SELF are accessed by sending messages,  rather than being explicitly identified as variables in the  source code and byte codes. And since there am no  classes in SELF, some of the class-based techniques used  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  57  
to optimize Smalltalk programs, such as inline caching,  type inferencing, and static type checking, cannot he  directly used in our SELF system.  Rather than compromising the flexibility of SELF  programs with a static type system, or compromising  the execution speed of programs by interpreting  dynamic type information, we have developed  compilation techniques that automatically derive much  of the type information statically specified in other  type systems. By combining this extra information with  a few general-purpose techniques from optimizing  compilers for traditional languages like Fortran and C,  our compiler achieves good performance without  sacrificing any of the comforts of an interactive,  exploratory programming environment: fast turnaround  for programming changes, complete source-level  debugging, and a simple, elegant programming language  unfettered by static type declarations. The next few  subsections summarize our new compilation techniques;  a more detailed discussion may be found in [CU89].  5.1. Customized Compilation  The Deutsch-Schiffman Smalltalk- system compiles a  single machine code method for  a given source code  method. Since many classes may inherit the same  method the SmalltaUc-80 compiler cannot know the  exact class of the receiver. Our SELF compiler, on the  other hand, compiles a different machine code method  for each type of receiver  that runs a given source  method. The advantage of this approach is that our SELF  compiler can know the type of the receiver of the  message at compile-time, and can generate much better  code for each of the specific versions of a method than it  could for a single general-puxpose compiled method.  We call this technique of dynamic translation of  multiple specially-compiled methods for a single  source-code method customized compilation.  Consider the  min : method defined for all objects:  min: arg = (  < arg ifTrue: [self] False: [arg] ).  This method could be invoked on integers, floating  point numbers, strings, or any other objects that can be  compared using <. Like other dynamic compilation  systems, our SELF system waits until the  min: method  is first invoked before compiling any code for this  method. Other systems would compile this method once  for all receiver and argument types, which would  require generating the code for a full message dispatch  to select the right < comparison routine. Since our SELF  compiler generates a separate compiled version for each  receiver type, it can customize the version to that  specific receiver type, and use the new-found type  information to optimize the < message.  Let’s trace the operations of our SELF compiler to  evaluate the expression  i min:  j, where i contains an  integer at nm-time. Assuming this is the first time  min : has been sent to an integer, our compiler will  generate code for a version of min: that is customized  for integer receivers. The compiler first builds the  following internal flow graph (expensive operations axe  in bold face):*  I I  send <  L  I  1  ,  4  1 push [self] 1  create-closure  send ifTrue:False:  Many of the expensive operations can be eliminated by  inlining messages sent to receivers of known type, as  described next.  * To simplify the discussion. message sends that access local  slots within the executing activation record (e.g. arguments) are  assumedto bereplaced with localregisteraccesses immediately.  58  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October l-6, 1989  
5.2. Message Inlining  Our compiler uses sources of type information, such as  the types of source-code literals and the type of self  gleaned from customized compilation, to perform  compile-time message lookup and message inlining. If  the type of the receiver of a message is known at  compile-time, the compiler can perform the message  lookup at compile-time rather than wait until run-time.  If this lookup is successful, which it will be in the  absence of dynamic inheritance and programming errors,  our compiler will do one of the following:  l If the slot contains a method, the compiler will  inline the body of the method at the call site, if the  method is short enough and nonrecursive.  l If the slot contains a block value method, the  compiler will inline the body of the block value  method at the call site, if it is short enough. If  after inlining there are no remaining uses of the  block object, the compiler will eliminate the code  to create the block at run-time.  l If the slot is a constant data slot, the compiler  will replace the message send with the value of the  slot (a constant known at compile-time). 
. If the slot is an assignable data slot, the compiler  will replace the message send with code to fetch  the contents of the slot (e.g. a load instruction).  l If the slot is an assignment slot, the compiler will  replace the message send with code to update the  contents of the slot (e.g. a store instruction).  After inlining all messages sent to receivers of lolown  type, the compiler will have inlined all messages that  in an equivalent Smalltalk program would have been  variable refe=nces or assignments, thus eliminating the  overhead in SELF of using message passing to access  variables. In addition, many more messages have been  inlined that in a Smalltalk system would have remained  full message sends.  For example, in the version of min: customized for  integers, the compiler can statically look up the  definition of < defined for integers:  < arg = (  IntLTPrim:  arg IfFail: [...I ).  This method simply calls the integer less-than  primitive with a failure block (omitted here for  brevity). The compiler inlines this < method to get to  the flow graph pictured at the top of the next column.  I  push self  ~~ I  1 push arg 1  1 create-closure 1  create-closure  send ifTrue:False:  The overhead for sending the < message has been  eliminated, but calling a procedure to compare integers  is still expensive. The next section explains how our  compiler  open-codes common  primitive built-in  operations to further increase performance.  5.3. Primitive Inlining  Primitive inlining can be viewed as a simpler form of  message inlining. Calls to primitive operations are  normally implemented using a simple procedure call to  an external function in the virtual machine. However,  like most other high-performance systems, including  some Smalltalk systems [DS84, JGZ88], our SELF  compiler replaces calls of certain common primitives,  such as integer arithmetic, comparisons, and array  accesses,  with their hard-wired definitions. This  significantly improves perfomumce since some of these  primitives can be implemented in two or three machine  instructions if the overhead of the procedure call is  removed. If the arguments to a side-effect-free  primitive,  such as an  arithmetic or comparison  primitive, are known at compile-time, the compiler  actually calls the primitive at compile-time, replacing  the call to the primitive with the result of the  primitive; this is SELF’s form of  constant folding.  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  59  
In our ongoing min: example, the compiler inlines the  1ntLTPrim:IfFai.l:  -  call (the definition of the  integer less-than primitive, but not the integer less-  than method, is hard-wired into the compiler) to get  the flow graph:  push [self]  I  create-closure  I  push [argl  I  &Elziz&  The first compare-and-branch sequence verifies that the  argument to the _ 1ntLTPrim:IfFail:  cd is also  an integer (the receiver is already known to be an  integer courtesy of customization); if not, the failure  block is created and invoked. If the argument is an  integer, then the two integers are compared, and either  the true object or the false object is returned as the  result of the < message.  The next message considered by our compiler is the  ifTrue:False: message. If arg is an integer--the  common case-the receiver of ifTrue: False: Will  be either true or false; otherwise it will be the result  of the value message (unknown at compile-time).  Normally, tbis would prevent inlining of the  ifTrue:False:  message, since the type of its  receiver cannot be uniquely determined. However, by  compiling multiple versions of  the ifTrue:False:  message, one version for each statically-known receiver  type, our SELF compiler can handle and optimize each  case separately. This technique is explained next.  5.4. Message Splitting  When type information is lost because the 5ow of  control merges (such as happens just prior to the  ifTrue:False: message in the min: example), our  SELF compiler may elect to split the message following  the merge into separate messages at the end of each of  the preceding branches; the merge is postponed until  after the split message. The compiler knows the type of  the receiver for some of the copies of the message, and  can perform compile-time message lookup and message  inlining to radically improve performance for these  versions. The proper semantics of the original unsplit  message is preserved by compiling a real message send  along those branches with unknown receiver types.  Message splitting can be thought of as an extension to  customized compilation, by customizing individual  messages  along particular control flow paths, with  similar improvements in run-time performance.  For the  min: example, the SELF compiler will split  the ifTrue:False:  message into three separate  versions:  and #3, arg  bzero  I  cmp self,arg  I  create-closure /$$I  create-closure  create-closure C  60  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October 1-6, 1989  
Now the compiler can inline the definition of  ifTrue:False: forthe trueobject:  ifTrue:  trueBlk False: falseBlk = (  trueBlk value ).  and for the false object:  ifTrue:  trueBlk False: falseBlk = (  falseBlk value ) .  to get to the following flow graph:  1 push ; self] 1 1 push iself]  1  push [ . . . ]  I  create-closure  I  send value  I  push [self]  I  create-closure  IIcreate-closure  1 Push ,L=-gl 1 1 push /arg] 1 1 push :arg] 1  I  create-closure  I I  createclosure  II  create-closure  1  i[self] valuei [arg] value i send ifTrue:  ~~~~1  The two value messages can be inlined, replaced by the  bodies of the blocks. Since none of the receiver and  arguments of the inlined ifTrue: False: messages  need to be created at run-time any more, the compiler  eliminates them from the control flow graph,  producing the following flow graph:  1 push .[ . . . I 1  1  send value1  I  1  1 push Lselfl 1  I  create-closure  I  I  I  1  1 push [argl 1  I create-closure I  Let’s assume that the failure block for integer  comparisons is too complex to inline away. The  compiler won’t inline the value message, and so the  value message’s result type is unknown at compile-  time. Thus the receiver type of the ifTrue:False:  message is unknown, and a simple SELF compiler  wouldn’t be able to inline this message away either.  However, the next subsection describes how our  compiler uses la-~own patterns of usage to predict that  the receiver of the ifTrue:False: message  Will be a  boolean and optimizes the message accordingly.  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  61  
5.5. Type Prediction  When the type of the receiver of a message is unknown  at compile-time, the SELF compiler uses static type  prediction  to generate better code for some common  situations. Certain messages are known to the compiler  to be likely to be sent to receivers of certain types: +  and < are likely to be sent to integers, and  ifTrue:False: is likely to be sent to either true or  false. The compiler generates a run-time test based on  the expected type or value of the receiver, followed by  a conditional branch to one of two sections of code;  along the “success” branch, the type (or value) of the  receiver is known  (at compile-time), along the  “failure” branch, the type is unknown. The compiler  then uses the message splitting techniques to split the  predicted message, compiling a copy of the message  along each branch. Because the compiler now knows the  type of the receiver of the split message along the  “success” branch, it can inline that version of the  message away, significantly improving performance for  common operations like integer arithmetic and boolean  testing. A real message send is executed in the case that  the prediction fails, preserving the original message’s  semantics for all possible receivers.  This type prediction scheme requires little additional  implementation work, since message splitting and  inlining is already implemented. It is also much better  hard-wiring the  ifTrue:ifFalse:,  whileTrue:, ==, +, and < messages into the parser  and compiler as SmaLltalk- systems do, since it  achieves the same sorts of performance improvements  but preserves the message passing semantics of the  language and aLlows the programmer to modify the  definitions of all SELF methods, including those that  are optimized through type prediction.  Let’s apply type prediction to the remaining  ifTrue:False: message in the min: example. The  compiler fust inserts run-time tests for the true object  and the false object, followed by several copies of the  ifTrue:False:  message (we’ll just look at the  remaining unoptimized branch):  create-closure  I  send  value  In the left branch, the receiver of ifTrue:False: is  known to be the value true; for the middle branch, the  receiver is known to be the value false. As before, the  Compiler idineS these IWO ifTrue:False: messages,  plus the corresponding value messages, and eliminates  the closure creations to get to the final flow graph for  the entire method, picture at the top of the next page.  62  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October 1-6, 1989  
__TJ 1 create-pure 1  \  1 send  value 1  create-closure create-closure  create-closure create-closure  I I  \I r  I  send ifTrue:  False:  In the common case of taking the minimum of two  integers,  our compiler executes only two simple  compare-and-branch sequences, for fast execution. A  simihr savings will be seen if the user calls min : on  two floating point numbers or two strings, since our  compiler customizes and optimizes special versions for  each of these receiver types. But even in the case of  taking the minimum of two values of different types,  such as an integer and a floating point number, our  compilation techniques preserve the message passing  semantics of the original source code, and execute the  source code faithfully.  6. Supporting the  Programming Environment  Our SELF system supports a high-productivity  programming environment. This environment requires  both rapid turn-around time for programming changes  and complete source-level debugging at the byte code  level. These features must coexist with our optimizing  compiler techniques,  including message inhning. The  next two subsections describe the compiler-maintained  change dependency links that support incremental  recompilation of compiled code  affected by  programming changes,  and the compiler-generated  debugging information that allows the debugger to  reconstruct inlined stack frames at debug-time. This  information is appended to each compiled method object  iu the compiled code cache.  a compiled method  a scope description  I  header  native  machine  code  scavenging info  k  $i~$$gg$?  :!:::::::;:;:i:v  depy;lzncy 
.y$;:::::::::  ::M:i:;:;::.’  &$#L:’ a ,,yte code mapp,ng  $$$>  :::::.:  p 
.+::g 
..,.:::::::z:::: 
.::::::::::::::::::  ,.~.:::::::::::::::::::::: 
..,~!~~~~Sl~ii(iiiiiiii 
.A.,..... .A........ .,I.......,... 
.‘.‘.‘.‘.‘f:.:.:.:.:......,:,:.:,:,: 
. ..A.. ..A.. .  :.:.:.: .,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,...,.,.,.,.,.,,  :i:i:~.~:1:~:i:b~::~~:~~:~:~:~ 
.,. ,.,.,.,.,., _.....,.,.,., 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  “‘!‘:‘:‘:.:::::::~:::::::::::: 
. ‘....:.::::~.~:~:~::~:  slot locations  A compiled method contains more than just instruc-  tions. It includes a list of the offsets within the in-  structions of embedded object references, used by the  scavenger to modify the compiled code if a refer-  enced object is moved. The compiled method includes  dependency links to support selective invalidation. It  also includes descriptions of the inlined method  scopes, which are used to fiid the values of local  slots of the method and to display source-level call  stacks, and a bidirectional mapping between source-  level byte codes and actual program counter values.  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  63  
6.1. Support for Incremental Recompilation  A high-productivity programming environment requires  that programming changes take effect within a fraction  of a second. This is accomplished in our SELF system by  selectively invalidating only those compiled methods  that m, affected by the programming change,  recompiling them from new definitions when next  needed. The compiler maintains two-way change  dependency links between each cached compiled method  and the slots that the compiled method depends on. The  information used to compile code-object formats and  the contents of non-assignable slots-is precisely the  information stored in maps. Therefore we can confine  our dependency links to maps. These links are formed in  four ways:  9 When a method is being compiled, the system  creates a dependency link between the map slot  description containing the method and the compiled  code in case the definition of the method changes or  its slot is removed.  l When the compiler inlines a message, the system  creates a dependency link between the matching slot  description (either  a method slot, a data slot, or an  assignment slot) and the compiled code in case the  definition of the inlined method changes or its slot  is removed.  l When the compiler searches a parent object during  the course of a compile-time lookup, the system  creates a dependency link between the slot  description containing the parent and the compiled  code in case the parent pointer changes and alters  the result of the lookup.  l When the compiler searches an  object  unsuccessfully for a matching slot during compile-  time lookup, the system creates a dependency link  between the map of the object searched and the  compiled code in case a matching slot is added to  the object later.  These rules ensure that no out-of-date compiled meth-  ods survive programming changes, while limiting invali-  dations to those methods actually affected by a change.  A dependency link is represented by a circular list that  connects a slot description or map to all dependent  compiled methods. When the system changes the  contents of a constant slot or removes a slot, it  traverses the corresponding dependency list and  invalidates all compiled code objects on the list. When  the system adds a slot, it similarly traverses the map’s  dependency list and invalidates linked compiled code  objects. Links must be removed from their lists when a  method is invalidated or a map is garbage-collected;  lists are doubly-linked to speed these removals.  compiled code for integer min:  (  dependency lists=  root  +-mr  inteaer I  trait;  T-t  I I  I  I ’  (map dependency) XG#~  (map dependency)  iffrue:False:  I=+  (map dependency)  I  incase min:  is changed  in case parent  than e affects  min: ookup f  in case 4 is  is changed  in case min:  is added  in case parent  change affects  < or min: lookups  in case < or min:  is added  in case  ifTrue:False:  is changed  in case  ifTrue:False:  is changed  The dependency lists for the compiled min: method custom-  ized for integers. The gray line represents eight separate  circularly-linked dependency lists. Each list connects a slot  description to its dependent compiled code objects. If any  of the map information linked to the compiled code chang-  es, the compiled code for min: (and for any other compiled  methods that depend on the same changed information) will  be thrown away and recompiled when next needed.  Selective invalidation is complicated by methods that  are executing when a programming change requires that  they be invalidated. The methods cannot really be  flushed, because they are still executing, and some co&  must exist. But neither can they remain untouched, since  they have been optimized based on information that is  no longer correct. One solution, which has not been  implemented yet, would be to recompile executing  methods immediately and to rebuild the execution stack  for the new compiled methods. We do not know yet if  this procedure  would be fast enough to keep  programming turn-around time short..  64  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October 1-6, 1989  
6.2. Support for Source-Level Debugging  A good programming environment must include a  source-level debugger The SELF debugger presents the  program execution state in terms of the programmer’s  execution model: the state of the byte code interpreter,  with no optimizations. This requires that the debugger  be able to examine the state of the compiled, optimized  SELF program, and construct a view of that state (the  virtuaE state) in terms of the byte-coded execution  model. Examining the execution state is complicated by  having methods in the virtual call stack actually be  inlined within other methods in the compiled method  call stack, and by allocating the slots of virtual  methods to registers and/or stack locations in the  compiled methods.  To allow the debugger to  reconstruct the virtual call stack from the physical  optimized call stack, the SELF compiler appends  debugging information to each compiled method For  each scope compiled (the initial method, and any  methods or block methods inlined within it), the  compiler outputs information describing that scope’s  place in the virtual call chain within the compiled  method’s physical stack frame. For each argument and  local slot in the scope, the compiler outputs either the  value of the slot (if it’s a constant known at compile-  time, as many slots are) or the register or stack location  allocated to hold the value of the slot at run-time.  Our SELF compiler also outputs debugging information  to support computing and setting breakpoints. This  information takes the form of a bidirectional mapping  between program counter addresses and byte code  instructions within a particular scope. One complexity  with this mapping is that it is not one-to-one: several  byte codes may map to the same program counter  address (as messages get inhned and optimized away),  and several program counter addresses may map to the  same byte code (as messages get split and compiled in  more than one place). To determine the current state of  the program in byte code tenus at any program counter  address, the debugger first finds the Iarest program  counter address in the mapping that is less than or equal  to the current program counter, and then selects the  latest byte code mapped to that address; this algorithm  returns the last byte code that has been started but not  completed for any program counter address, The  min:  I I  selt: rl  arg: f-2  The debugging information for the min: method. Each  scope description points to its calling scope description  (black arrows); a block scope also points to its lexically-  enclosing scope description (gray arrows). For each slot  within a scope, the debugging information identifies ei-  ther the slot’s compile-time value or its run-time location.  For the min: example, only the initial arguments have nm-  time locations (registers rl and r2 in this case); all other  slot contents are known statically at compile-time.  execution stack displayer uses this mapping information  to find the bottommost virtual stack frame for each  physical stack frame to display the call stack whenever  the program is halted.  We have not implemented the breakpointing facilities in  our debugger yet; the current “debugger” displays the  virtual execution stack and immediately continues  execution whenever the -DumpSelfStack primitive is  called. However, our mapping system is designed to  support computing and setting breakpoints in  anticipation of breakpointing  and process  control  primitives. To set a breakpoint at a particular source-  level byte code, the debugger would find all those  program counter addresses associated with the byte code  and set breakpoints there. In cases where several byte  codes map to the same program counter address, single  stepping from one  byte code to the next wouldn’t  actually cause any instructions to be executed, the  debugger would pretend to execute instructions to  preserve the illusion of byte-coded execution.  October 1-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  65  
7. Performance Comparison  SELF is implemented in 33,000 lines of C++ code and  1,000 lines of assembler, and runs on both the Sun-3 (a  68020-based machine) and the Sun-4 (a SPARC-based  machine). We have written  almost 9,000 lines of SELF  code, including a hierarchy of collection objects, a  recursive descent parser for SELF, and a prototype  graphical user interface.  We compare the performance of our first-generation  SELF  implementation with a fast Smalltalk  implementation and the standard Sun optimizing C  compiler on a &m-4/260 workstation. The fastest  Smalltalk  system  currently  available (excluding  graphics performance) is the ParcPlacc V2.4 p2  Smalltalk- virtual machine, rated at about 4  Dorados* [pP88]; this system includes the Deutsch-  Schiffman techniques described earlier. We compare  transliterations from C into Smalltalk and SELF of the  Stanford integer benchmarks men881 and the Richards  operating system simulation benchmadr [Deu88], as  well as the following smail benchmarks, adapted from  Smalltalk- systems FTcC!83]:  sumToTe& = ( 1 sumTo: 10000 ).  sumTo :  arg = (  I total <- 0 I  to:  arg Do: I I :index I  total: total + index.  1.  total ).  recurseTest = ( 14 recurse ).  recurse = (  = 0 ifFalse: [  (- 1)  recurse.  (- 1)  recurse.  3 1.  We also rewrote most of the Stanford integer  benchmarks in a more SELFish programming style,  using the first argument of a C function as tbe receiver  of the corresponding SELF method. Measurements for  the rewritten benchmarks are presented in columns  labeled SELF’; times in parentheses mark those  benchmarks that were not rewritten.  * A “Dorado” is a measure of the performance of Smalltalk  implementations. One Dorado is defined as the performance of  an early Smalltalk implementation in microcode on the 7011s  Xerox Dorado [Deu83]; until recently it was the fastest  available Smalltalk implementation.  The following table presents the actual running times  of the benchmarks on the specified platform. All times  are in milliseconds of CPU time, except for the  Smalltalk times, which are in milliseconds of real time;  the real time measurements for the SELF system and the  compiled C program are practically identical to the  CPU time numbers, so comparisons in measured  performance between the ParcPlace SmaRtalk system  and the other two systems are valid.  Raw Running Times  Smalltalk  SELF  SELF’  (real ms) (cpu ms) (cpu ms) (cpu m$  perm  1559 660 420  120  towers 2130 900  z-F%  859 520  i%  E  1490 970  F$  16510 5290  (“Z$  1  160  770  1239  110  bubble 2970  1% 1230 170  tree  1760  1750  1480 820  richards 7740 2760 (2760)  730  sumToTe& 25 18  (‘8)  4  recurreTest 169 52  (52)  32  The entries in the following table are the ratios of the  running times of the benchmarks for the given pair of  systems. From our point of view, bigger numbers am  better in the first two columns, while smaller numbers  am better in the last two columns. The most  meaningful rows of the table am probably the rows for  the median of the Stanford integer benchmarks and the  row for the Richards benchmark.  Relative Performance of SELF  Smalltalk/ SmalHalW Smalltalk/ SELF/  SELF’/  SELF SELF’ C C  C  perm  $:i  3.7  13.0  2;  3.5  towers 3.8 11.2  Fgy .  1.8  5:;  puule i:  1.5 ES  3  6.1)  quick 1:s  I 1  ;::,  21:4  11.3  :!  I  bubble  1.8  2.4 17.5  9:s  %?  7.2  tree  ::x ::;  2.1  min  1%  z  5:s  :.t  median  E X:; 21:4  5:1  max  9.8 7.2  richads 2.8  (2.8)  10.6 3.8  (3.8)  sumToTest 1.4  (1.4)  6.2  4.5  (4.5)  recurseTest 3.2 (3.2) 5.3 1.6  (1.6)  Our SELF implementation outperforms the Smalltalk  implementation on every benchmark; in many cases  SELF runs more than twice as fast as Smalltalk. Not  surprisingly, an optimizing C compiler does better than  the SELF compiler.  Some of the difference in  66  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October I-6, 1989  
performance results  from  significantly poorer  implementation in the SELF compiler of standard  compiler techniques such as register allocation and  peephole optimization. Some of the difference may be  attributed to the robust semantics of primitive  operations in SELF: arithmetic operations always check  for overflow, array accesses always check for indices  out of bounds, method calls always check for stack  overflow. The rest of the difference is probably caused  by the lack of type information, especially for  arguments and assignable data slots. We are remedying  these deficiencies to a large extent in the second-  generation SELF system described in the next section.  The above table shows that the performance of object-  oriented systems is improving dramatically. As a new  metric for comparing the performance of these systems,  we propose the millions of messages per second  (MiMS) measure, analogous to the millions of  instructions per second (MIPS) measure for processors.  This number measures the performance of an object-  oriented system in executing messages. To compute the  MiMS rating of a system for a specific benchmark on a  particular hardware platform, divide the number of  messages the benchmark sends by its total running time.  We define message sends as those invocations whose  semantics include a dispatch; for SELF, this includes  references to slots in the receiver (“instance variable”  accesses), since the same reference could invoke a  method, but excludes references to slots local to a  method invocation (“local variable” accesses), since  these could never do anything other than access data. We  computed the MiMS rating of our first-generation  SELF system for the Richards benchmark on the  SPARC-based Sun-4/260 to be 3.3 MiMS, or a message  executed every 300ns [Lee88].  The efhciency of an object-oriented system is inversely  proportionaI to the number of instructions executed per  message sent. The cycle time on the Sun-4/260 is 6Ons  [Nam88], giving our SELF system a cost per message of  about 5 cycles. Since the SPARC has been clocked at 1.6  cycles per instruction [Nam88] (accounting for cache  misses and multicycle instructions), this would give  our SELF system an efficiency rating of around 3  instructions per message sent. We are not aware of any  other implementations of dynamically-typed object-  oriented languages that approach this level of efficiency.  Other researchers have attempted to speed Smalltalk  systems by adding type declarations to Smalltalk  programs.  Atkinson’s Hurricane compiler compiles a  subset of Smalltalk annotated with type declarations  [Atk86]. He reports a performance improvement of a  factor of 2 for his Hurricane compiler over the Deutsch-  Schiffman system on a 68020-based Sun-3; our initial  SELF system already achieves the same performance  improvement  over the Deutsch-S&i&an system  without type declarations. Johnson’s TS Typed  Smalltalk system type-checks and compiles Smalltalk-  80 programs fully annotated with type declarations  [JGZ88]. He reports a performance improvement of a  factor of between 5 and 10 over the Tektronix  Smalltal.k-80 interpreter on a 68020-based Tektronix  4405. For a benchmark almost identical to our  sumToTest benchmark, he reports an execution time  of 62ms, which we executed in 18ms on a machine 3 to  4 times faster than his machine. This makes his system’s  performance roughly comparable to our system’s  performance, even though his system relies on type  declarations while ours does not. These results suggest  that our compilation techniques do a good job of  extracting as much type information as is available to  these other systems through programmer-supplied type  declarations.  8. Future Work  SELF has not reached its fmal state. Although we have  established the feasibility and rewards  of the  implementation techniques described in this paper, much  work remains.  8.1. The Second-Generation SELF System  We are in the process of reimplementing our entire  SELF system to clean up our code, simplify our design,  and include better compilation algorithms. As of this  writing (July 1989), we have completely rewritten the  object storage system and unified the run-time/compile-  time message lookup system. We have implemented the  core of the second-generation compiler, and it is now  compiles and executes about half of our SELF code.  The new compiler performs type flow analysis to  determine the types of many local slots at compile-  time. It also includes a significantly more powetil  message splitting system. The initial message splitter  described in this paper only splits a message based on  the type of the result of the previous message; the  second-generation message splitting system can use any  type information constructed during type flow analysis,  October I-6, 1989  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  67  
especially the types of local slots. The message splitter  may elect to split messages even when the message is  not immediately after a merge point, splitting all  messages that intervene between the merge that lost the  type information and the message that needs the type  information.  Our goal for the combined type analyzer and extended  message splitter is to ahow the compiler to split off  entire sections of the control flow graph, especially  loop bodies, that manipulate the most common data  types. Along these common-case sections, the types of  most variables will be known at compile-time, leading  to maximally-inlined code with few run-time type  checks; in the other sections, less type information is  available to the compiler, and more full message sends  are generated. Under normal conditions the optimized  code will be executed, and the method will run fast,  possibly just as fast as for a C program. However, in  exceptional situations,  such as when an overflow  actually occurs, the flow of control will transfer to a  less optimized section of the method that preserves the  message passing semantics.  Our second-generation compiler also performs data  flow analysis, common subexpression elimination, code  motion, global register allocation, and instruction  scheduling. We hope that the addition of these  optimizations will allow our new SELF compiler to  compete  with high-quality production optimizing  compilers.  8.2. Open Issues  Method arguments are one of the largest sources of  “unknown”  type information in the current compiler.  We want to extend our second-generation system to  customize methods by the types of their arguments in  addition to the receiver type. This extension would  provide the compiler with static type information about  arguments so it could generate faster code. These  benefits have to be balanced against the costs of  verifying the types of arguments in the prologue of the  method at run-time.  The compile-time lookup strategy works nicely as long  as all the parents that get searched am constant parents;  if any am assignable, then the compile-time lookup  fails, and the message cannot be inlined. Our second  generation system  provides limited support for  dynamically-inherited methods by adding the types of  any assignable parents traversed in the run-time lookup  to the customization information about the method; the  method prologue tests the values of the assignable  parents in addition to the type of the receiver. We plan  to investigate techniques to optimize dynamically-  inherited methods.  The message inliner needs to make better decisions about  when to inline a method, and when not to. The inliner  should use information about the call site, such as  whether it’s in a loop or in a failure block, to help  decide whether to inhne the send, without wasting too  much extra compile time and compiled code space. It  should also do a better job of deciding if a method is  short enough to inline reasonably; counting the byte  codes with a fixed cut-off value as it does now is not a  very good algorithm. Finally, our implementation of  type prediction hard-wires both the message names and  the predicted type; a mom dynamic implementation that  used dynamic profile information or analysis of the  SELF inheritance hierarchy might produce better, more  adapting results.  The current implementation of the compiler, though  speedy by traditional batch optimizing compiler  standards, is not yet fast enough for our interactive  programming environment. The compiler takes over  seven seconds to compile and optimize the Stanford  integer benchmarks (almost 900 lines of SELF code),  and almost three seconds to compile and optimize the  Richards benchmark (over 400 lines of SELF code). We  plan to experiment with strategies in which the  compiler executes quickly with little optimization  whenever the user is waiting for the compiler, queuing  up background jobs to recompile unoptimized methods  with full optimization later.  Work remains in making sure that our techniques are  practical for larger systems than we have tested. To  fully understand the contributions of our work, we  need to analyze the relative performance gains and the  associated space and time costs of our techniques. This  analysis will be performed as part of the first author’s  forthcoming dissertation,  68  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October 1-6, 1989  
9. Conclusions  Many researchers have attempted to boost the  performance of  dynamically-typed object-oriented  languages. The designers of Smalltalk- hard-wired  the definitions of user-level arithmetic and control  methods into the compiler, preventing the users from  changing or overriding them. Other researchers added  type declarations to Smalltalk, thereby hindering reuse  and modification of code. We devised  dynamic  customized compilation, static type prediction, type  flow analysis,  message splitting, and message inlining to  automatically  extract and  preserve static type  information. Our measurements suggest that our system  runs just as fast as Smalltalk systems with type  declarations and at least twice as fast as those with  hard-wired methods. Researchers seeking to improve  performance should improve their compilers instead of  compromising their languages.  SELF’s novel features do not cost the user either  execution time or storage space. Our virtual machine  supports the prototype object model just as space- and  time-efficiently as similar class-based systems; maps  act as implementation-level classes and thus reclaim the  efficiency of classes for the implementation without  inflicting class-based semantics on the SELF user.  SELF’s use of messages to access variables has  absolutely no effect on the fmal performance of SELF  programs, since these message sends are the first to get  inlined away. Once an implementation reaches this level  of sophistication  and performance, the information  provided by classes and explicit variables becomes  redundant and unnecessary. Prototype-based languages  can run just as fast as class-based languages.  Our implementation  introduces new techniques to  support the programming environment. The segregation  of object references from byte arrays speeds scavenging  and scanning operations.  Dependency lists reduce the  response time for programming changes. Detailed  debugging information maps the execution state into the  user’s source-level execution  model,  transparently  “undoing” the effects of method inlining and other  optimizations.  Our techniques are not restricted to SELF; they apply to  other dynarnicaIly-typed object-oriented languages like  Smalltalk, Flavors, and CLOS. Many of our techniques  could even be applied to statically-typed object-oriented  languages like Ct+ and Trellis/Owl. For example,  customization and automatic inlining could be used to  eliminate many C-t-+ virtual function calls, encouraging  broader use of object-oriented features and programming  styles by reducing their cost. Compiler-generated  debugging information could be used by the C++  debugger to hide the inlining from the user, just as our  compiler  generates debugging  information to  reconstruct the SELF virtual call stack.  SELF is practical: our implementation of SELF is twice  as fast as any other dynamically-typed purely object-  oriented language documented in the literature. The  SELF compiler achieves this level of efficiency by  combining traditional optimizing compiler technology  like procedure inhning and global register allocation,  specialized techniques developed for high-speed  Smalltalk systems like dynamic translation and inline  caching, and new techniques like customization, message  splitting, and type prediction to bridge the gap between  them. The resulting synergy of old and new results in  good performance.  Acknowledgments  We owe much to Randy Smith, one of the original  designers of SELF. We also would like to thank Peter  Deutsch for many instructive discussions and seminal  ideas for the design and implementation of SELF. Bay-  Wei Chang implemented our graphical SELF object  browser and contributed to discussions on the future of  the SELF language and implementation.  References  [ASU86] Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey D.  Ullman.  Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and  Tools. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1986.  [Atk86]  Robert G. Atkinson. Hurricane: An Opti-  mizing Compiler for Smalltalk. In OOPSLA ‘86 Con-  ference Proceedings,  pp. 151-158, Portland, OR,  1986. Published as SZGPLAN Notices Zl(Il), Novem-  ber, 1986.  pMW86] Mark B. Ballard, David Maier, and Allen  Wirfs-Brock. QUICKTALK A Smalltalk- Dialect  for Defining Primitive Methods. In OOPSLA ‘86 Con-  ference Proceedings, pp. 140-150, Portland, OR,  1986. Published as  SZGPLAN Notices 2I(lI), Novem-  ber, 1986,  [Bob881 D. G. Bobrow  et al. Common Lisp Object  System Specification. In SIGPLAN Notices 23(Special  Issue), September, 1988.  October 1-6, 1989 OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  69  
[BI82] A. H. Borning and D. H. H. Ingalls. A  type declaration and inference system for Smalltalk.  In Conference Record of the Ninth Annual Sympo-  sium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 133-  139,1982.  [Bor86]  A. H. Boming. Classes Versus Prototypes  in Object-Oriented Languages. In Proceedings of the  ACMIEEE Fall Joint Computer Conference, pp. 36-  40, Dallas, TX, 1986.  [Cur891  Pave1 Curtis. Type inferencing in Small-  talk. Personal communication, March, 1989.  [~@‘I  Craig Chambers and David Ungar. Customi-  zation: Optimizing Compiler Technology for SELF, a  Dynamically-Typed  Object-Oriented  Programming  Language. In Proceedings of the SIGPLAN ‘89 Confer-  ence on Programming Language Design and Impiemen-  tation,  Portland, OR, June, 1989. Published as SIGP-  LAN Notices 24(7), July, 1989.  peu83] L. Peter Deutsch. The Dorado Smalltalk-  Implementation. Hardware Architecture’s Impact on  Software Architecture. In &1x83], pp. 113-126.  Peu88] L. Peter Deutsch. Richards benchmark. Per-  sonal communication, October, 1988.  peu89]  L. Peter Deutsch. Expanded byte codes for  primitives. Personal communication, June, 1989.  K’S841  L. Peter Deutsch and Allan M. Schiffman.  Efficient Implementation of the Smalltalk- Sys-  tem.  In Proceedings of the 11 th Annual ACM Sympo-  sium on the Principles of Programming Languages, pp.  297-302, Salt Lake City, UT, 1984.  [GR83] Adele Goldberg and David Robson. Small-  talk-80: The Language and Its Implementation. Addi-  son-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1983.  men881 John Hennessy. Stanford integer bench-  marks. Personal communication, June, 1988.  [JGZ88]  Ralph E. Johnson, Justin 0. Graver, and  Lawrence W. Zurawski. TS: An Optimizing Compiler  for Smalltalk. In OOPSLA ‘88 Conference Proceed-  ings,  pp. 18-26, San Diego, CA, 1988. Published as  SZGPL.AN Notices 23(11), November, 1988.  cKra831  Glenn Krasner, editor. Smalltalk-80: Bits of  History, Words of Advice.  Addison-Wesley, Reading,  MA, 1983.  ILee881  Elgin Lee. Object Storage and Inheritance  for SELF, a Prototype-Based Object-Oriented Pro-  gramming Language. Engineer’s thesis, Stanford Uni-  versity, 1988.  Lie861 Henry Lieberman. Using Prototypical Ob-  jects to Implement Shared Behavior in Object-Orient-  ed Systems. In OOPSLA ‘86 Conference Proceedings,  pp. 214-223, Portland, OR, 1986. Published as SIGP-  LAN Notices 21(1 I), November, 1986.  ILTPW  Wilf R. LaLonde, Dave A. Thomas, and  John R. Pugh. An Exemplar Based Smalltalk. In  0OPSL.A ‘86 Conference Proceedings, pp. 322-330,  Portland, OR, 1986. Published as SIGPL.AN Notices  21(11), November, 1986.  [McC83]  Kim McCall. The Smalltalk- Bench-  marks. In [Kra83], pp. 153-174.  WyW  Bertrand Meyer. Genericity versus Inherit-  ance. In OOPSEA ‘86 Conference Proceedings, pp.  391-405, Portland, OR, 1986. Published as SIGPLMV  Notices 21(11), November, 1986.  [Moo861  David A. Moon. Object-Oriented Program-  ming with Flavors. In  OOPSLA ‘86 Conference Pro-  ceedings, pp. 1-16, Portland, OR, 1986. Published as  SIGPLAN Notices 21 (II), November, 1986.  [Nam88]  Masood Namjoo et al. CMOS Gate Array  Implementation of the SPARC Architecture. In  COMPCON ‘88 Conference Proceedings, pp. 10-13,  San Francisco, CA, 1988.  [PP88] ParcPlace Newsletter, Winter 1988, Vol.  1, No. 2. ParcPlace Systems, Palo Alto, CA, 1988.  [Sch86]  Craig Schaffert et al. An Introduction to  Trellis/Owl. III OOPSLA ‘86 Conference Proceed-  ings,  pp. 9-16, Portland, OR, 1986. Published as SIG-  PLAN Notices 21(11), November, 1986.  [Ste76]  Guy Lewis Steele Jr. LAMBDA: The Ulti-  mate Declarative. AI Memo 379, MIT Artificial In-  telligence Laboratory, November, 1976.  [Ste87]  Lynn Andrea Stein. Delegation Is Inherit-  ance. Iu OOPSLA ‘87 Conference Proceedings, pp.  138-146, Orlando, FL, 1987. Published as  SIGPLAN  Notices 22(12), December, 1987.  [SS76]  Guy Lewis Steele Jr. and Gerald Jay Suss-  man. LAMBDA: The Ultimate Imperative. AI Memo  353, MIT Amficial Intelligence Laboratory, March,  1976.  [Str86] Bjame Stroustrup.  The C++ Programming  Language. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1986.  [Suz8 11  N. Suzuki. Inferring Types in Smalhalk.  In 8th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Pro-  gramming Languages, pp. 187-199,198l.  WwW  David Michael Ungar. The Design and  Evaluation of a High-Performance Smalltalk System.  Ph.D. dissertation, the University of California at  Berkeley, February, 1986. Published by the MIT  Press, Cambridge, MA, 1987.  D-JJW  David Ungar and Frank Jackson. Tenuring  Policies for Generation-Based Storage Reclamation. In  0OPSL.A ‘88 Conference Proceedings, pp. l-17, San  Diego, CA, 1988. Published as SZGPLAN Notices  23(11), November, 1988.  [US871  David Ungar and Randall B. Smith. SELF:  The Power of Simplicity. In  0OPSL.A ‘87 Conference  Proceedings, pp. 227-241, Orlando, FL, 1987. Pub-  lished as SIGPLAN Notices 22(12), December, 1987.  lYeg871  Peter Wegner. Dimensions of Object-Based  Language Design. In  OOPSLA ‘87 Conference Pro-  ceedings, pp. 227-241, Orlando, FL, 1987. Published  as  SIGPLAN Notices 22(12), December, 1987.  70  OOPSLA ‘89 Proceedings  October 1-6, 1989