Diskette  Referen e  Manual  
DISKETTE REFERENCE MANUAL  INDEX  Ia. 3M DISKETTE PRODUCT DESCRIPTION CODES • .    . Page A  I. INTRODUCTION  
I I.  DISKETTE PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION  
III.  DISKETTE MANUFACTURING FLOW Page 11  IV. MAGNETIC RECORDING OF DISKETTES .    .    .    .    .    . Page 13  V. DISKETTE ARCHITECTURE AND FORMATS .    .    .    .    . Page 15  VI. PRODUCT COMPATABILITY DETERMINATION .    .    .    . Page 21  VII. PROPER USE AND HANDLING RECOMMENDATIONS .    . Page 33  VIII. GLOSSARY OF DISKETTE AND COMPUTER TERMS .    . Page 37  © Copyright 3M, 1982 Effective Date: May 1, 1983  
Ia.  3M DISKETTE PRODUCT DESCRIPTION CODES  SS SINGLE SIDE  DS DOUBLE  SIDE  SD  SINGLE DENSITY  DD  DOUBLE  DENSITY  32  32  SECTORS  R  REVERSIBLE  W/WP WITH WRITE  PROTECT  /F BYTE  FORMAT  (ie: 128/F)  RH  REINFORCED  HUB  10 10 SECTORS  16 16 SECTORS  -A- 
I. INTRODUCTION  Very simply, a diskette is a storage device for a computer  system. It is used to augment the computer's memory  capacity. The information on diskettes can be deleted  and/or updated. The recording process is similar to audio  tape recording where sound waves of varying amplitude and  frequ~ncy are recorded on magnetic tape--but there the  analogy ends. In diskette recording, information is  digitally encoded on the magnetic surface using  sophisticated techniques much different than that of audio  recording. It is these recording techniques and the  various parameters which affect diskette storage capacity  that will be addressed in this manual.  Diskettes are currently offered in two sizes -an 8" (200  mm) version, and a   5 1/4" (130 mm) mini-version. The  dimensions refer to the side length of the square-shaped  jacket (cartridge) within which the circular recording disk  is enclosed.  The flexible diskette cartridge is inserted into a diskette  drive whose function is to a) rotate the media within the  jacket, b) write information onto the disk as dictated by  the system, and c) read information back from the diskette.  One of the main reasons that diskettes are so popular is  that the recorded information can be accessed readily.  -1- 
The purpose of this manual is to provide technical  information on diskettes. With this knowledge you will be  able to meet the sales and service needs of almost every  user of diskettes.  -2- 
II. DISKETTE DESCRIPTION  All diskettes have three major components: the jacket, the  liner, and the media itself. The full cartridge assembly  is enclosed in an envelope to protect it when not in use.  See Figure 1.  Figure 1  I  JACKET  III  MEDIA  I. The jacket is made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC). It  protects the media from physical damage caused by  handling and storage.  -3- 
There are various holes, slots, and notches punched in  the jacket (See Fig. 2   -note that jackets pictured are  void of media).  3M  tr---------1. Label -------~'__?~._~~;._'" ----'  ~  00  ~~  6. Head Access Slot  r  7. Stress Relief  _ Notches  Figure 2  1. Permanent identification label -identifies diskette,  its usable sides, format, density, and product number.  2. Drive Spindle Hole -allows the drive clamping  mechanism and spindle access to the media for rotation  within the jacket.  3. Write Enable Notch (5 1/4" only) -This is currently a  standard feature on all 5 1/4" diskettes. In most  cases, if the notch is uncovered, the diskette is  "write enabled." Information can be written on the  surface when the notch is uncovered. However, there  are some systems that use the opposite convention, and  still others who ignore it entirely.  -4- 
Again, the "write enable" notch is standard on all 5  1/4" diskettes and the way it is used is dictated by  the system.  4. Jacket Index Hole -an opening that, when aligned with  an index hole punched in the media, permits the system  to start the read/write operation.  The location of the index hole varies on 8 inch (200  rom) diskettes, so it can be used to help identify the  type of product the customer needs. The intent of the  OEM's in placing the jacket index hole(s) in different  locations is to ensure compatibility of diskettes with  the hardware. As an example, a single side/single  density diskette (3M SS-SD diskette) cannot function on  a double side/double density system.  Currently, the index hole location is the same for all  5 1/4" (130 mm) diskettes.  Figure 3 shows the various locations of the index hole  in different types of jackets:  5. Write Protect Notch (8" only) -This is an optional  physical feature which is dictated by the system. Some  systems manufacturers design this for diskettes whose  contents need to be protected, i.e., system master or  program diskettes. If the notch is uncovered, the  -5- 
diskette is "write protected." The contents previously  written on the diskette cannot be altered. When the  notch is covered by a tab, the information can be  changed at any time.  6. Head Access Slot -permits the read/write heads of the  drive to load on the media, access the individual  tracks on which the data is contained and to perform  the actual recording operations. This is the most  important area of the diskette jacket.  7. Stress Relief Notches -distribute the force of any  jacket stress near the head access slot. This prevents  damage to the media caused by bending, which can result  in degradation of its storage ability.  -6- 
Figure 3  A. 5 1/4" (130 mm) diskettes  o  B. 8" (200 mm) diskettes  D  c.  D  -7- The index hole  is located at  approximately  104° for all  3M 5~" diskettes.  The index hole for  3M SS-SD and SS-DD  diskettes is located  at approximately 7°.  The index hole for  3M DS-DD diskettes  is located at 
. t I 2.6.° .  approx1.ma e   y  
D.  D  E.  D  F.  D  Figure 3 (cont.)  The index holes for 3M  SS-SO-R and SS-DO-R-l28/F  reversible diskettes are  located at approximately  7° on each side.  The index holes for 3M  OS-00-32 hard sectored  diskettes are 7° and 26°.  The index hole for the 3M  Vydec compatible diskette  is located at approximately  225°. Also, notice the  extra notch in the lower  left corner of the jacket.  -8- 
II. Liner  The liner inside the jacket cartridge is a special-purpose,  non-woven, highly-durable fabric. It is laminated to the  PVC prior to folding. As the media rotates within the  jacket, the liner material continually cleans the disk by  removing debris from the surface of the media. The  smallest amount of debris can greatly reduce a diskette's  ability to record/read properly. The liner also provides a  surface which allows uniform torque and rotational speed.  III. Media  The media itself is the magnetic recording material  consisting of a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate  and unoriented iron oxide and binder dispersion on both  sides. The nominal substrate thickness is 0.003 inches  (0.076 mm) and the nominal oxide coating thickness 110  microinches (0.00279 mm).  -9- 
 I I I.  MANUFACTURING FLOW  Figure 4 shows the flow of events and the process that is  followed during the manufacturing of a diskette.  Throughout  this process there are numerous mechanical and electrical  tests/controls that must be satisfied to produce a quality  product.  Media  Substrate in  stock roll  Stock roll coated  on both sides  with iron oxide  and binder  dispersion  @  Coated stock  roll slit  ©  Punched to  appropriate size  and configuration  @  Burnish  Process  Q)  ®  '---__ .....-__ ....1  Ship  Figure 4  -11- D  Jacket  Jacket material  in stock form  ®  Cut to  appropriate  jacket  size  ®  o  Laminated with @  lined material  Punched  to  appropriate  hole  configuration  ®  Three way folded CD'  Top left open  
 IV. MAGNETIC RECORDING OF DISKETTES  In basic terms, any digital magnetic recording is  accomplished by the magnetization of minute areas on the  surface of a diskette. (See Figure 5.)  SUBSTRATE 
.. MOTION  WINDINGS  CORE  OXIDE  COATING  OXIDE  COATING  Figure 5  CROSS  SECTION OF  DISKETTE  A current in the coil of a read/write head (electromagnet)  induces a magnetic field through the core and across the gap.  The lines of force, or magnetic flux, take the most  conductive path across the gap in the head, which is the  magnetic surface of the diskette.  The oxide coating becomes magnetized and remains so after  the diskette leaves the field of the read/write head.  -13- 
Now, reverse the process and pass the same portion of the  diskette under the head. The magnetization of this section  is sensed by the record head and a current is induced in the  core windings. This is how the system reads back signals  previously recorded on the surface.  The capability now exists through a host of electronic  control devices of writing and reading a series of these  minute magnetized areas. Let it be assumed that the presence  of a magnetized area represents a logical "1" and the absence  of such an area represents a logical "0". These logical  "l's" and "O'S" are referred to as bits. An eight-bit  combination is called a byte. These bytes are directly  translatable to letters, characters, and numbers.  For instance, assume during a read operation the drive head  sensed the flux pattern of 0-1-0-0-0-0-0-1. This corresponds  to a unique pattern of lis and O's recognized by a system as  the letter "A" (In ASCII code).  Density relates to the number of bits -that can be recorded  in a given length of a track. Therefore, a double-density  diskette stores twice the amount of information as a  single-density. Double-density media must be more reliable  than single-density media because critical information is  recorded on a smaller area of the diskette.  -14- 
v. DISKETTE ARCHITECTURE AND FORMATS  The information stored in a diskette is organized by  addressable locations. These locations are designated by a  track and sector number. The recording surface of a diskette  is similar to a pie cut up into evenly-spaced sections, or  sectors, and concentric rings for tracks. The data is  searched track-by~track and then recorded or read serially on  a specific track.  Tracks on a diskette are sequentially numbered, starting from  the outside diameter (00) and going to the inside diameter  (ID). Track 0 is the outermost track on all diskettes with  higher number tracks being found at inside diameter.  Reference Figure 7.  Note: Diskette drive manufacturers have recognized an  opportuni ty  to increase diskette reco.rding capacity by  increasing the number of tracks on the recording surface.  These products are referred to as "96 TPI" or "Quad-density."  They have double the number of tracks per inch (TPI) as  standard diskettes. The SS-DD-RH, DS-DD-RH diskettes and  all 8" diskettes are recorded at 48 TPI.  -15- 
LOWEST ORDER TRACK  TRACK  0 -51/l' + 8"  HIGHEST ORDER TRACK  TRACK  76 -8"  TRACK 39 -5114" 48 TPI  TRACK 79 -5114" 96 TPI  Figure 7  The data on each track of a diskette is stored in sectors.  A 50ft-sectored diskette is one whose sector boundaries are  determined by specific bit patterns recorded on the media.  These specific bit patterns combine to form the ID area and  define the sector boundaries. The hard-sectored diskette  boundaries are determined by holes punched in the media.  -16- 
INDEX  HOLE  HIGHEST  ORDER TRACK  INDEX  HOLE  SOFT  SECTOR  DISKETTE  HARD SECTOR  SOFT SECTOR  Figure 8  -17- 
All diskettes, hard or soft sectored, have one index hole  punched in the media. This index hole acts as a clocking or  timing device between the spinning media and the diskette  drive.  One hard-sectored configuration (32 hole plus one) exists for 8  inch (200 mm) diskettes. 5 1/4 inch (130 mm) diskettes are  currently available in two hard-sector configurations. These  are 10 plus one and 16 plus one. Figure 9 shows the currently  available hard and soft-sectored diskettes.  o  8 Inch  Soft  Sector  1  Index Hole  8 Inch  Hard Sectored  32 Sector  Holes  1 Index Hole  8 Inch  3MVydec  Compatible  32 Sector Holes  1 Index Hole  Figure 9  -18- 5 1 /4 Inch  Soft  Sector  Index Hole  5 1 /4 Inch  Hard Sector  10 Sector Holes  1 Index Hole  5114 Inch  Hard Sector  16  Sector  Holes  1 Index Hole  
Before a diskette (both hard and soft sectored) can be used on  a system, it must be formatted and initialized.  Before initialization, a diskette must be formatted. A  formatted diskette has sector address identification (ID)  information written on the surface, and space has been allotted  for the data field. Formatting is done by the manufacturer.  At times it can be done by the customer on the system.  Initialization is the process of preparing a formatted diskette  for system use. This process identifies the specific use for  the diskette.  A pre-programmed diskette is a diskette that has already been  formatted, initialized and has specific data written in the  data field portions of the sectors. This data is then read by  the system and prompts either the system or the operator to  perform a certain task. Examples of these kinds of diskettes  are self-teaching aids and specific functions, such as  accounting and inventory control.  -19- 
 VI. PRODUCT COMPATIBILITY DETERMINATION  It is important to ensure that the proper 3M diskette is  recommended for use on a customer's system. Diskette drive  manufacturers have designed drives which require a wide  range of diskette configurations and formats.  This section provides the following:  A. A step-by-step method of determining diskette/  hardware compatability.  B. A list of the available 3M diskettes.  c. A systematic approach to analyze and solve  customer problems.  -21- 
 Diskette Compatibility  I. What is the system manufacturer (OEM) and model number?  Refer  to 3M diskette cross reference/compatibility list and recommend proper  product.  II. What is the diskette you are currently using, name and part number?  Refer  to 3M diskette competitive cross reference list and recommend proper  product.  If no 3M product can be recommended, ask the customer the following ques- tions to determine physical compatibility:  III. If  the customer uses 8" diskettes,  Size  8"  Diskettes  Recording  Surface  Single  Recording  Surface  Dual  Recording  Surface  Density  Single  Density  Double  Density  Single  Density  Double  Density  Sectoring  Soft  Hard  Soft  Hard  Soft  Hard  Soft  Hard  • A Write Protect Notch is located in lower right corner of jacket.  IV. If the customer uses 5-1/4 " diskettes,  Diskette  SS-SO  SS-SO-32  SS-OO-W/wP*  SS-00-128F  SS-00-32*  -- -- OS-~O  OS-00-32*  Size  Recording  Surface  Density  TPI  Number of  Sector Holes  Diskette  0  Single  Single/  48 TPI  10  16  Recording  Double  Surface  Density  0  96 TPI  10  51/4 "  16  Diskettes  0  Dual  48  TPI 10  Double  16  Recording  Density  Surface  0  96 TPI 10  16  All 5 1 /4"  Diskettes have a write enable notch located in the upper right hand corner of the jacket.  A reinforced hub is  available on all 5114" Diskettes.  *The SS-DD-RH is  compatible with single and double density drives.  -23- SS-OD-RH*  SS-DD-10RH*  SS-DD-16RH*  SS-DD-96TPI-RH  SS-DD-96TPI-10RH  SS-DD-96TPI-16RH  DS-DD-RH  DS-DD-10RH  DS-DD-16RH  DS-DD-96TPI-RH  DS-DD-96TPI-10RH  DS-DD-96TPI-16RH  
I  tv  M:::o  I  B. 3M DISKETTE PRODUCT LIST (8")  Product Available  Sector/ Byte/  Tracks/  Usable  Capacity  #  Format  Track Sector  Side Sides  Density  Unformatted  Formatted  Vydec  Compatible  32  128  77 1 SINGLE  305K  (F)  400K (U)  SS-SD 26 x 128 26 128  77  1  SINGLE  246K  (F)  400K (U)  Wang Compatible  32  77  1  SINGLE  400K  SS-SD-32RH  SS-SD-32  32  77  1 SINGLE  400K  SS-SD-R  26 x 128 26 128  77 2  SINGLE  492K (F)  800K (U)  CPT 6000-8000  16 x 256 16 256  77 1  SINGLE  303K (F)  Compatible  400K  (U)  SS-DD-W/WP  77  1  DOUBLE  800K  SS-DD-128/F  26 x 128 26 128  77  1 DOUBLE  492K (F)  800K  (U)  SS-DD-32  32 77  1 DOUBLE 800K  SS-DD-R-128/F  26 x 128  26 128  77 2 DOUBLE  q84K  (F)  l600K (U)  DS-DD*  77 2  DOUBLE  DS-DD-I024/F  8   x 1024  8  1024  77  2  DOUBLE  1212K (F)  1500K (U)  DS-DD-32  32 77 2 DOUBLE  l600K  *MAY BE FORMATTED TO ANY BYTE CONFIGURATION (IE 256, 512 AND 1024).  Write/  (U) Protect  Comments  (F)  OPTIONAL  A HARD SECTOR DISKETTE  WITH THE SECTOR HOLES  ON THE 0.0. GENERAL  USE FOR WORD PROCESSOR  SYSTEMS.  OPTIONAL  A SINGLE SIDE, SINGLE  DENSITY  8" DISKETTE.  YES  REINFORCED HUB.  YES  A HARD SECTOR SS-SD.  NO  A REVERSIBLE SS-SD.  HAS 2 INDEX HOLES IN  THE JACKET.  YES  FOR USE WITH CPT WORD  PROCESSING SYSTEMS.  YES  A SINGLE SIDED, DOUBLE  DENSITY DISKETTE.  NO  A SINGLE SIDED,  DOUBLE  DENSITY 8" DISKETTE  FOR USE ON DEC SYSTEMS.  FORMAT IS SINGLE DEN- SITY. DATA IS DOUBLE  DENSITY.  YES  A HARD SECTO~  SS-DD-W/WP.  NO  A REVERSIBLE SS-DD-W/WP.  FOR USE ON DEC SYSTEMS  (SEE ABOVE) .  HAS 2  INDEX  HOLES IN THE  JACKET.  OPTIONAL  A DOUBLE DENSITY  DOUBLE SIDED DISKETTE.  YES  A HARD SECTOR OS-DO.  
I  I:V  U1  I  Product  Available Sector/ Byte/  #  Format Track Sector  APPLE FILEWARE"  SOFT*  COMPATIBLE  DS-DD-RH  SOFT  DS-DD-10RH  10  DS-DD-16RH 16  SS-DD-RH  SOFT  SS-DD-10RH  10  SS-DD-16RH  16  SS-DD-96TPI-RH  SOFT  SS-DD-96TPI-10RH  10  SS-DD-96TPI-16RH  16  DS-DD-96TPI-RH  SOFT  DS-DD-96TPI-10RH  10  DS-DD-96TPI-16RH  16  *Has two head access slots. No index hole.  3M DISKETTE PRODUCT LIST (5~")  Tracks/  Usable  Side Sides  46 2  40 2  40 2  40 2  40  1  40 1  40 1  80 1  80 1  80 1  80 2  80 2  80 2  Capacity  Density Unformatted (U)  Formatted (F)  HIGH 871K  DOUBLE 500K  DOUBLE  500K  DOUBLE 500K  DOUBLE 250K  DOUBLE 250K  DOUBLE 250K  DOUBLE 500K  DOUBLE 500K  DOUBLE  500K  DOUBLE  1. OM  DOUBLE  1. OM  DOUBLE  1. OM  UOneUIWJataa  Atmqetedwo::> t:>npOJd  r.;rrite/  Enable  Comments  YES  FOR USE ON APPLE COM- PUTER'S UNIFILE '" AND  DUOFILE'" DISKETTE  DRIVES  AND APPLE LISA'"  COMPUTER SYSTEMS.  YES  YES A HARD SECTOR  DS-DD-RH.  YES A HARD SECTOR  DS-DD-RH.  YES A SINGLE SIDED,  DOUBLE  DENSITY SS-DD-RH.  YES  YES  YES  A SINGLE SIDED  96TPI  5~" DISKETTE.  YES  A HARD SECTOR  SS-DD-96TPI-RH.  YES  A HARD SECTOR  SS-DD-96TPI-RH.  YES  A DOUBLE SIDED  96TPI  5~" DISKETTE.  YES  A HARD SECTOR  DS-DD-96TPI-RH.  YES  A HARD SECTOR  DS-DD-96TPI-RH.  
I  N  0"1  I  GENERAL CATEGORIZATION -1M BRAND  1. 8-INCH DISKETTES -SOFT SECTOR  A. SS-SD's ARE SINGLE SIDED AND SINGLE DENSITY UNLESS FOLLOWED BY A "/2" WHICH INDICATES A REVERSIBLE  (2 USABLE SIDES).  B. SS-DD's ARE SINGLE SIDED AND DOUBLE DENSITY UNLESS FOLLOWED BY A "/2" WHICH INDICATES A REVERSIBLE  (2 USABLE SIDES).  C. DS-DD's ARE DOUBLE SIDED AND DOUBLE DENSITY.  2. 8-INCH DISKETTES -HARD SECTORED  A. SS-SD'S, SS-DD's AND DS-DD's HAVE 32 SECTOR HOLES PUNCHED NEAR THE I.D. FOR SECTOR BOUNDARY.  B. VYDEC COMPATIBLE DISKETTES HAVE 32 SECTOR HOLES PUNCHED NEAR THE O.D. FOR SECTOR BOUNDARY AND ARE USED  ONLY ON VYDEC SYSTEMS.  3. 5~" DISKETTES -SOFT SECTOR  A. SS-DD-RH's ARE SINGLE SIDED AND DOUBLE DENSITY.  B. DS-DD-RH's ARE DOUBLE SIDED AND DOUBLE DENSITY.  C. SS-DD-96TPI-RH's ARE SINGLE SIDED AND DOUBLE DENSITY FOR 96 TPI APPLICATIONS.  D. DS-DD-96TPI-RH's ARE DOUBLE SIDED AND DOUBLE DENSITY FOR 96 TPI APPLICATIONS.  4. 5~" DISKETTES -HARD SECTORED  A. SS-DD-RH's, DS-DD-RH's, SS-DD-96TPI-RH's and DS-DD-96TPI-RH's ARE AVAILABLE IN 10 or 16 SECTOR HOLES  PUNCHED IN THE I.D. FOR SECTOR BOUNDARY.  
C. CUSTOMER PROBLEM ANALYSIS  This section reviews methods of handling some of the  most common customer complaints.  One of the first priorities to handling a customer  complaint is to attempt to isolate the problem to media  or hardware. Ask the customer the following questions:  Is the problem repeatable on the same drive?  Can the problem be duplicated on other drives?  Is the same type of failure occurring consistently?  Can the mode of failure be localized on the  diskette to tracks, sectors, or addresses?  If the answers to any of these questions is no, there may  be a hardware problem. Recommend that the customer  contact his equipment representative for service.  Uncovering this information will enable you to provide  quick and efficient service to the customer.  If you cannot isolate the problem based on those  questions, this section contains some suggestions on how  to effectively troubleshoot customer complaints.  In this section, the following symptoms are discussed:  1. After inserting the diskette, the drive will not  become ready.  2. The customer can read but not write.  -27- 
3. The customer can write but not read back the data at  a later time.  4. While reformatting a diskette, the customer  encounters write errors.  1. Symptom: AFTER INSERTING THE DISKETTE, THE DRIVE  WILL  NOT BECOME READY.  Corrective Action:  a. Verify product compatability.  b. Check tor damage by examining the diskette  through the head access slot and in the  centerhole area. Point out the damage and  isolate the source that caused the damage.  c. Have the customer attempt to do a "read  certification" of the diskette. This will  indicate if one or all tracks cannot be read. If  none of the tracks can be read, the format on the  diskette may have been destroyed. Reformat the  diskette, if possible.  d. Consult drive maintenance personnel to examine  diskette drive index sensing device.  -28- 
2. Symptom: THE CUSTOMER CAN READ BUT NOT WRITE.  Corrective Action:  a. Examine the diskette to ensure it is not  write-protected. Remember, when an 8" diskette  has the write protect notch uncovered, the  information cannot be altered or written over.  The 5 1/4" diskette is write protected only when  the write enable notch is covered.  3. Symptom: THE CUSTOMER CAN WRITE BUT NOT READ BACK  THE DATA AT A LATER TIME.  Corrective Action:  a. Check the diskette for physical damage on the  recording surface and at the hub centerhole.  b. Have the customer perform a "read certification"  on the diskette. This chec~s all the data and  address fields for errors without destroying the  recorded data. Record the failing address of each  error encountered during the read certification.  If only data field errors are encountered, this is  a good indication that the drive is not properly  writing information on the diskette. If address  field errors are encountered, there may be an  alignment problem on the drive or a drive  -29- 
malfunction. At this point, consult the drive  maintenance personnel. If the "read  certification" detects read errors on the  high-numbered tracks which are closest to the  inner diameter of the media, have the drive  maintenance personnel examine the drive for  proper head load pressure pad force and pressure  pad condition. Excessively worn pressure pads  will result in read errors.  c. Have the drive maintenance personnel examine the  drive for proper head alignment.  d. Have the drive maintenance personnel examine the  drive for proper electronic calibration (this  includes logic levels in the power supplies,  electrical response from the drive head, and  write currents).  4. Symptom: WHILE REFORMATTING A DISKETTE, THE CUSTOMER  ENCOUNTERS WRITE ERRORS.  Corrective Action:  a. Examine the diskette for physical damage that  could cause write errors.  b. Have the customer assign an alternate track when  possible.  -30- 
c. Have the drive maintenance personnel examine the  drive for proper head load pressure pad force,  pad condition, and head cleanliness.  If the problem continues, 3M's Customer Quality Engineers  should be consulted.  -31- 
 VII. PROPER USE AND HANDLING RECOMMENDATIONS  A. Proper care and handling of a diskette can  eliminate damaged diskettes and lost data.  1. Refrain from smoking, eating, or drinking when  handling a diskette to keep from contaminating  the media surface.  2. Never allow the diskette to be placed near a  magnetic field created from objects such as  magnets, electric motors, transformers, etc.  Contact with these objects could and probably  will result in a loss of data.  3. Do not bend or fold a diskette. This will  result in damage to the media such as an  indentation and head to media contact will be  degraded. This, in turn, will cause a loss of  data during a read operation.  4. Never use paper clips or rubber bands on a  diskette. This could cause jacket and/or  media damage resulting in possible operation  failure.  5. Do not touch or attempt to clean the media  exposed by the jacket openings. This could  result in media contamination and possible  system failure.  -33- 
6. Never allow a diskette to be exposed to  excssive heat (greater than 1250 (52 0 C» or  direct sunlight. This can cause distortion  in the PVC jacket and, thus, may result in data  loss due to head conformance problems.  Expansion or contraction of the media results  in performance degradation.  7. Never place heavy objects on a diskette.  Heavy objects could either bow the jacket or  cause permanent damage to the media.  8. Whenever a write-on label is full, replace it  with a new one. Never stack these labels on  top of each other, as eventually the diskette  thickness could be such that drive insertion  problems could result.  9. Never try to erase information written on the  write-on label as the eraser debris could get  into the diskette and could lead to diskette  and/or drive damage.  10. Use only a soft felt-tip pen to write on the  labels. Indentations could result from  ballpoint pens or pencils and result in read  errors.  -34- 
B. The proper environment for diskette operation and  storage will enhance performance.  1. Operating and storage temperature range:  (48TPI: sOOF to 125 0  --lOoC to s2 0 C)  (96TPI: sooF to 115 0  --lOoC to 46 0 C)  2. Operating and storage relative humidity range:  (48TPI: 8% to 80% RH -Wet Bulb less than  85 0 F)  (96TPI: 20% to 80% RH -Wet Bulb less than  80 0 F)  3. Test Environment:  4.  Temperature Range: 75 0  + 50F  (22.8 0  + 2.8 0 C)  Relative  Humidity Range:  40%  to 60%  hours of acclimatization  Transportation:  Temperature  Range: -40 0 F  to 125 0 F  (-40 0  to  51.6 0 C)  after  Relative Humidity Range: 8% to 90% with no  condensation allowed.  -35- 24  
 VIII. GLOSSARY OF DISKETTE AND COMPUTER TERMS  Address - Basic - Bit - Block - BPI - Byte - CPU - Character - CRT - Digital - The location of any physical record on  the diskette, specified by the  cylinder number, head number, and  record number.  Beginner's all-purpose symbolic  instruction code, the most popular  personal computer programming  language.  Smallest unit of data storage  represents either a I or a O.  A set of adjacent logical records  recorded as a unit.  Bits per inch  8 bits, the amount of storage needed  for I character.  Central Processing Unit, controls  peripheral devices and stores program  instructions. This is the "brains" of  the computer.  A single letter or number.  Cathode Ray Tube, the display screen  for computers.  Of or relating to data in the form of  numerical digits.  -37- 
Direct or Random  Access - Dropin - Dropout - Extra Pulse - File - Flag - Hard Error - I. D. - I/O Device - Index Cylinder - Made  possible by rotating disks. The  system can go directly to data without  reading unwanted data.  See Extra Pulse  See Missing Pulse  Any Magnetic pulse, usually single,  which remains after a data group or  stream has been erased.  Groups of related records stored  together.  A term used to describe a track on a  diskette that is unusable: a  "flagged" track is one that the  computer will not access.  An error that is repeatable in the  same track and sector location.  Inner Diameter  (Input/Output) Any device used to  enter or retrieve data from a computer  (Examples: diskette drives, CRT's,  printers) •  Cylinder 00. This cylinder is used to  store information about the contents  of the diskette.  -38- 
Initialization - Magnetic Flux - Magnetic Head - Microcomputer - Missing Pulse - OD - OEM - Operating System - Pascal - Pressure Pad - The process of writing the addresses,  index cylinder information, and other  system information on the diskette.  (Initialization is also used to assign  alternate tracks.)  Lines of force used to represent  magnetic induction.  A small electromagnet used for  reading, recording, or erasing on a  magnetic surface.  Also personal computer, a computer  based on a microprocessor chip.  The absence of a pulse where one  was expected.  Outer Diameter  Original Equipment Manufacturer  The software instructions used to  control the work of a computer.  A programming language for personal  computers.  Part of read/write head assembly for  single-sided diskette systems.  Located on side I (unused), it  provides support to a diskette for  good side 0 head to media contact.  -39- 
Program - Retentivity - Reversible - Read - Sector - Soft Error - Software - The instructions, either written by  the user or purchased ready to run,  that tell the computer how to perform  a given task.  The capacity of retaining a magnetic  field after the magnetizing force has  been removed.  Can be recorded on both sides by  removing the diskette and turning it  over to record on the reverse side.  The process of sensing the magnetic  fields on the diskette recording  surface and converting them into  machine-usable code.  The addressable units into which each  track is divided.  Errors that are non-repeatable. These  types of errors are caused by debris  on the diskette surface or are induced  by the system.  A term given to those instructions,  written in programming language, that  tell the computer system how to  operate and process data.  -40- 
Track - Write - That portion of the diskette recording  surface available to one read/write  head at each access position.  The process of generating magnetic  fields on the recording surface on the  diskette. These magnetic fields  represent interpretable codes to the  system.  -41- 
Data Recording Products Division/3M  223-5N 3M Center  St. Paul, Minnesota 55144  Litho in U.S.A. with 3M Offset Plates. Film and Proofing SystemS.