Easy RISC-V   

Easy RISC-V

(Last updated: 2025-10-27 14:51)

*   [Introduction](#introduction)
*   [My first RISC-V assembly program](#my-first-risc-v-assembly-program)
*   [Emulator controls](#emulator-controls)
*   [Processor state](#processor-state)
*   [Instruction syntax](#instruction-syntax)
*   [Computational instructions](#computational-instructions)
    *   [Arithmetic instructions](#arithmetic-instructions)
    *   [Bitwise instructions](#bitwise-instructions)
    *   [Comparison instructions](#comparison-instructions)
    *   [Shift instructions](#shift-instructions)
    *   [That’s it…?](#thats-it)
    *   [Summary of computational instructions](#summary-of-computational-instructions)
*   [Intermission: Larger numbers](#intermission-larger-numbers)
*   [Jumps and branches](#jumps-and-branches)
    *   [Branches](#branches)
    *   [Jumps](#jumps)
    *   [Jump and link](#jump-and-link)
*   [Memory](#memory)
    *   [Basic memory accesses](#basic-memory-accesses)
    *   [Smaller widths](#smaller-widths)
    *   [Memory-mapped I/O](#memory-mapped-io)
*   [Functions](#functions)
    *   [Register aliases and calling conventions](#register-aliases-and-calling-conventions)
    *   [The stack](#the-stack)
*   [Intermission: Numeric labels](#intermission-numeric-labels)
*   [Position independence](#position-independence)
*   [Privileged architecture fundamentals](#privileged-architecture-fundamentals)
    *   [Privilege levels](#privilege-levels)
    *   [Control and status registers (CSRs)](#control-and-status-registers-csrs)
    *   [Counters](#counters)
    *   [Current privilege level](#current-privilege-level)
*   [Exceptions](#exceptions)
    *   [Exception entry](#exception-entry)
    *   [Exception causes](#exception-causes)
    *   [Exception return](#exception-return)
*   [Handling User mode](#handling-user-mode)
    *   [Entering User mode](#entering-user-mode)
    *   [Intentionally causing an exception](#intentionally-causing-an-exception)
    *   [Saving and restoring all registers](#saving-and-restoring-all-registers)
*   [Writing a very very bare bones operating system](#writing-a-very-very-bare-bones-operating-system)
    *   [Design](#design)
    *   [Code](#code)
    *   [Pseudocode reference](#pseudocode-reference)
*   [Lies and omissions](#lies-and-omissions)
*   [References](#references)
*   [Thanks](#thanks)
*   [License](#license)
*   [Index](#index)
    *   [Instructions](#instructions)
    *   [Registers and CSRs](#registers-and-csrs)
    *   [Special assembly syntax](#special-assembly-syntax)
    *   [Other terms](#other-terms)

[(Emulators disabled version)](?no-emulator)

This page is not designed to be used on a narrow screen or without CSS. If you’re having issues using the emulator, try the [emulators disabled version](?no-emulator).

An interactive introduction to RISC-V assembly programming, by [dramforever](https://github.com/dramforever).

Interested in the code? Want to report an issue? Check out the GitHub page: [https://github.com/dramforever/easyriscv](https://github.com/dramforever/easyriscv)

# [](#introduction)Introduction

Inspired by [Easy 6502 by Nick Morgan](https://skilldrick.github.io/easy6502/), this is a quick-ish introductory tutorial to RISC-V assembly programming. This tutorial is intended for those with a basic familiarity with low level computer science concepts, but unfamiliar with RISC-V. If you’re curious about RISC-V, I hope this will be a good start to your journey to learning about it.

RISC-V (pronounced “risk-five”), as its name suggests, is [RISC (Reduced instruction set computer)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reduced_instruction_set_computer) architecture. Having started its life at UC Berkerley, RISC-V has bred a lively community of students, researchers, engineers and hobbyists working on software and hardware. Some highlights of RISC-V include:

*   Clean design: Although loosely based on many previous designs, RISC-V is at its core a new and clean design. It does away with integer status flags like “carry” or “overflow”, and does not have MIPS’s branch delay slots. RISC-V is designed primarily as a target for compilers, but writing RISC-V assembly by hand is still quite pleasant.
*   Open standard: RISC-V specifications are developed publicly and anyone can use them without copyright or patent licensing issues. Many researchers and companies around the world have made their own RISC-V processor cores and chips based on these specificaions.
*   Community support: If you want to make your own processors, rather than paying a hefty license fee to Arm, or designing your own architecture, you can just use RISC-V. Using RISC-V instead of a custom architecture allows you to make use of the existing and growing software ecosystem instead of having to maintain your own.

RISC-V is less mature than more established architectures like x86 or Arm, but it is quickly gaining steam and has found great success in many areas of application, such as embedded systems, custom processors, education, and research.

This article will cover the 32-bit bare bones RV32I\_Zicsr instruction set with a tiny subset of the privileged architecture. You’ll probably never find a “real” chip with such bare bones instruction support. Most of them will have more _extensions_ for other features like floating point or compressed instructions. However, I would still consider what we have here a “complete” instruction set. For example, Rust has [Tier 2 support](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rustc/platform-support/riscv32-unknown-none-elf.html) for the target `riscv32i-unknown-none-elf` which works completely fine with only the instructions we’ll cover here.

Speaking of instructions we will cover, why don’t we meet the 45 of them right here and now:

```
lui auipc
jal jalr
beq bne blt bge bltu bgeu
lb lh lw lbu lhu sb sh sw
addi slti sltiu xori ori andi slli srli srai
add sub slt sltu xor or and sll srl sra
ecall ebreak
csrrw csrrs csrrc csrrwi csrrsi csrrci
```

Some of these instruction names should ring a bell (`add`, `or`, `xor`). Others will look like they have some pattern to it. A few weird ones like `auipc` stand out. These instructions form the foundation of RISC-V, performing the basic tasks a processor would do.

You will also catch a glimpse of what creating an operating system on RISC-V is like, namely handling exceptions and privilege levels.

Let’s get started.

# [](#my-first-risc-v-assembly-program)My first RISC-V assembly program

Throughout this article you will see emulator panes like these:

(If you just see a code block, there’s a JavaScript problem. Make sure you’ve enabled JavaScript, probably…)

start: addi x10, x0, 0x123 ebreak

You can use the buttons to control each emulator. Go ahead and click on ‘Start’. A register view should pop up showing the state of the emulator. Now click on ‘Run’. You’ll notice that:

```
a0 (x10) 0x00000000
```

Changed into:

```
a0 (x10) 0x00000123
```

And the emulator stopped. Congratulations, you’ve run your first RISC-V assembly program. First here, at least.

# [](#emulator-controls)Emulator controls

‘Start’ assembles your code and, well, starts the emulator. If there’s a problem with your code, it will tell you about it and the emulator will not start.

When the emulator is started, you can see the current state of the registers in the side pane. More controls also becomes available. ‘Run’ runs until the end or until you hit ‘Pause’. ‘Step’ runs a single step.

If you hit ‘Step’, you’ll notice that the above program takes two steps to run. You may have guessed correctly that the first step corresponds to `addi`, and the second corresponds to `ebreak`. The top of the register panel shows `pc`, the current instruction address, and in parentheses the current instruction.

‘Dump’ opens a new window containing some text. There are two sections: the first is the symbol table, which tells you about the labels in your code:

```
# Symbols
# 0x40000000 start
```

The second section is an annotated version of your code:

```
start:
{ 0x40000000: 12300513 } addi x10, x0, 0x123
{ 0x40000004: 00100073 } ebreak
```

This tells you that the `addi` instruction encodes to hex `12300513`, and starts at address hex `40000000`. Similarly, `ebreak` encodes as `00100073` at address hex `40000004`.

(Note: RISC-V instructions are _little-endian_, meaning that the four bytes of `addi` are actually `13 05 30 12`.)

We’ll talk in detail about all of `pc`, registers, instructions, labels, and the two checkboxes later.

Now you may have also guessed that `addi x10, x0, 0x123` means `x10 = x0 + 0x123`. As for `ebreak`, for now, just remember that `ebreak` stops the emulator.

# [](#processor-state)Processor state

The _program counter_, or _`pc`_ is the address of the current instruction. It points to the instruction to be executed.

RV32I has 31 _general purpose registers_ numbered _`x1` through `x31`_. These can contain any 32-bit data.

(If you’re wondering, there are no flags for RV32I.)

The register _`x0`_ is a special “zero register”. For computational instructions, you can use `x0` anywhere a register is expected. Reading it always gives zero, and writing to it just gets ignored. The use of a special register simplifies the design of the architecture, and this design is shared by MIPS and Arm AArch64. We will make good use of `x0` soon.

(Note: In the emulator, the instruction listed in parenthesis next to `pc` in the register view is provided as a convenience and is not part of the processor state.)

# [](#instruction-syntax)Instruction syntax

But before we can start talking about instructions themselves, we need a way to talk about the _instruction syntax_ so I can, you know, write it down for you.

The syntax of an instruction is the instruction name and then several comma-separated operands. For example, for this instruction we’ve seen above:

```
addi x10, x0, 0x123
```

`x10` is the _destination register_ or _`rd`_. The next operand is the first (and only) _source register_ or _`rs1`_. The last operand is an _immediate value_ or _`imm`_. Using these abbreviations, we can summarize that the syntax for `addi` is:

```
addi rd, rs1, imm
```

Some other instructions have a second source register or _`rs2`_. For example, the non-immediate `add` instruction has this syntax:

```
add rd, rs1, rs2
```

Some other instructions have no operands, like `ebreak`. Others have slightly more complex operands.

# [](#computational-instructions)Computational instructions

Using the registers as a playground of numbers, we can use computational instructions to work with them.

## [](#arithmetic-instructions)Arithmetic instructions

As we’ve seen above, you can get a RISC-V machine to add numbers together.

The _`addi`_ instruction adds the value in `rs1` to the immediate value `imm`, and puts the result in `rd`.

```
addi rd, rs1, imm
```

The _`add`_ instruction adds the value in `rs1` to the value in `rs2`, and puts the result in `rd`.

```
add rd, rs1, rs2
```

The opposite of addition is subtraction. The _`sub`_ instruction subtracts the value in `rs2` from the value in `rs1` (i.e. `rs1 - rs2`), and puts the result in `rd`. There’s no corresponding `subi` instruction — Just use `addi` with a negative number.

```
sub rd, rs1, rs2
```

Step through this demo program and try writing your own additions and subtractions:

addi x10, x0, 0x123 addi x11, x0, 0x555 addi x12, x10, 0x765 add x13, x10, x11 sub x14, x11, x10 addi x10, x10, 1 addi x10, x10, 1 addi x10, x10, -1 addi x10, x10, -1 ebreak

One thing you should note is that the immediate value has a limited range, namely `[-2048, 2047]`, the range of a 12-bit two’s complement signed integer. This limitation is because RV32I uses fixed 32-bit i.e. 4-byte instructions, and only the top 12 bits are available to encode an immediate value. You can see the hexadecimal value encoded in the instruction from the ‘Dump’. This article will not go into much further detail about instruction encodings.

```
{ 0x40000000: 12300513 } addi x10, x0, 0x123
{ 0x40000004: 55500593 } addi x11, x0, 0x555
```

Even instructions as simple as addition and subtraction have other interesting uses. We have already used `addi x10, x0, 0x123` to put `0x123` in the register `x10`. When writing in assembly, we can use a little shortcut called _pseudoinstructions_. The _`li`_ (“load immediate”) pseudoinstruction is a convenient way to put a small value in a register. It expands to `addi rd, x0, imm` when `imm` is in the range `[-2048, 2047]`.

```
li rd, imm
```

When `imm` is `0`, `addi` copies the value without changing it because adding zero is the same as doing nothing. The _`mv`_ (“move”) pseudoinstruction copies the value from `rs1` to `rd`. It expands to `addi rd, rs1, 0`.

```
mv rd, rs1
```

Using the pseudoinstruction is exactly equivalent to using the “real” instruction. You can see in the dump that the two are assembled exactly the same way.

addi x10, x0, 0x123 li x10, 0x123 addi x11, x10, 0 mv x11, x10 ebreak

Subtracting from zero is negation. What’s the negative of `0x123`?

li x10, 0x123 sub x11, x0, x10 ebreak

Hmm, we get `0xfffffccd`. That’s the 32-bit _two’s complement_ representation of `-291`, or `-0x123`. There’s plenty of tutorials on this out there, so we’ll just note that whenever something is “signed”, RISC-V uses two’s complement representation. The benefit of this is that there are fewer instructions for separate signed and unsigned instructions — both signed and unsigned numbers have the same overflow wrap-around behavior.

Speaking of overflow wrap-around, what happens if we add something too much and it overflows? We’ll use `add` to repeatedly double `0x123` and see what happens:

li x10, 0x123 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 add x10, x10, x10 ebreak

As `0x123` crawls up to the upper bits and eventually we get to `0x9180_0000`, in the next iteration it turns into `0x2300_0000`. There was an overflow! Doubling of `0x9180_0000` gives `0x1_2300_0000`, but that needs 33 bits in binary, so the highest bit can’t be put in the result. Since RISC-V doesn’t have flag bits for carry or overflow, it’s simply gone. The programmer is expected to deal with this.

## [](#bitwise-instructions)Bitwise instructions

While we’re talking about bits, another thing we can do with bits is performing bitwise logical operations on them.

The _`and`_ instruction performs a bitwise-“and” between the bits of `rs1` and `rs2` and puts the result in `rd`. The _`or`_ and _`xor`_ instructions similarly performs bitwise-“or” and bitwise-“xor”, respectively.

```
and rd, rs1, rs2
or rd, rs1, rs2
xor rd, rs1, rs2
```

Immediate operand versions of the three, namely _`andi`_, _`ori`_, _`xori`_ also exist.

```
andi rd, rs1, imm
ori rd, rs1, imm
xori rd, rs1, imm
```

Here are some random bit operation examples you can play with:

li x10, 0x5a1 xori x10, x10, 0xf0 xori x10, x10, -1 li x11, 0x5a1 addi x12, x11, -1 and x11, x11, x12 addi x12, x11, -1 and x11, x11, x12 addi x12, x11, -1 and x11, x11, x12 li x13, 0x5a1 ori x14, x13, 0xf ori x14, x13, 0xff ori x14, x13, 0xf0 ebreak

Remember that the immediate value is in the range `[-2048, 2047]`. For negative values, the two’s complement representation used means that the high bits are all ones. For example, using `-1` as `imm` means the second operand is binary all ones, or `0xffff_ffff`. This allows us to use `xori rd, rs1, -1` as bitwise-“not”.

li x10, 0x5a1 xori x11, x10, -1 or x12, x10, x11 add x13, x10, x11 ebreak

Another interesting operation you can do is to round/_align_ something up or down to a multiple of a power of two. For example, if you want to find the closest multiple of 16 below `a`, in binary that would be clearing the lowest 4 bits, or `a & ~0b1111`. Conveniently, that’s `a & -16` in two’s complement.

Aligning up is less intuitive, but one idea would be adding 16 first. However that gives an incorrect result for multiples of 16. It’s easy enough to fix though: adding one less works exactly right: `(a + 15) & -16`

li x10, 0x123 andi x11, x10, -16 addi x12, x10, 15 andi x12, x12, -16 ebreak

## [](#comparison-instructions)Comparison instructions

Usually when you write a comparison of some sort like `a == b` or `a >= b`, it’s used as a condition for some `if` or loop, but… those things are complicated! We’ll get to it later.

Sometimes you just want a boolean value out of a comparison. The C convention uses 1 for true and 0 for false, and since the world runs on C now, that’s what RISC-V provides.

In C there are six comparison operators:

```
== != < > <= >=
```

The values being compared can also be both signed or both unsigned.

How many comparison instructions do we have at our disposal? Let’s see…

The _`slt`_ (“set less than”) instruction compares `rs1` and `rs2` as signed 32-bit integers, and sets `rd` to `1` if `rs1 < rs2`, and `0` otherwise (`rs1 >= rs2`). The _`sltu`_ instruction is similar but it treats the operands as unsigned values. _`slti`_ and _`sltiu`_ are similar but the second operand is an immediate value.

```
slt rd, rs1, rs2
sltu rd, rs1, rs2
slti rd, rs1, imm
sltiu rd, rs1, imm
```

(Of particular note is `sltiu`, where the immediate operand still has the range `[-2048, 2047]` but is sign extended to 32 bits and then treated as an unsigned value, like what would happen in C with `a < (unsigned)-1`.)

That’s… one of the six comparisons settled. What about the others? As it turns out, we can synthesize any of the other five, using up to two instructions.

Making `>` from `<` is easy, as you can just swap the operands. Using `xori` with `1` we can invert the result of a comparison, giving as `<=` and `>=`.

li x10, 0x3 li x11, 0x5 slt x12, x10, x11 # x10 < x11 slt x13, x11, x10 # x10 > x11 xori x14, x12, 1 # x10 >= x11 i.e. !(x10 < x11) xori x15, x13, 1 # x10 <= x11 i.e. !(x10 > x11) ebreak

That was signed comparison but unsigned comparison works the same using `sltu` instead of `slt`.

As for `==` and `!=`, let’s tackle the easier case of `a == 0` and `a != 0` first. We will use the fact that for unsigned values, `a != 0` is equivalent to `a > 0`. The negation of that is `a <= 0`, which is the same as `a < 1`.

li x10, 0 sltu x11, x0, x10 # 0 <u x10 i.e. x10 != 0 sltiu x12, x10, 1 # x10 <u 1 i.e. x10 == 0

As a bonus, this is also how we get logical not and converting integer to boolean.

Now that we have these, `a == b` is just `(a - b) == 0`, and `a != b` is just `(a - b) != 0`.

li x10, 0x3 # a li x11, 0x5 # b sub x10, x10, x11 # x10 = a - b sltu x11, x0, x10 # 0 <u x10 i.e. x10 != 0 sltiu x12, x10, 1 # x10 <u 1 i.e. x10 == 0 ebreak

In summary: (`[u]` means use `u` for unsigned comparison and nothing for signed comparison)

*   `a < b`: `slt[u]`
*   `a > b`: `slt[u] reversed`
*   `a <= b`: `slt[u] reversed ; xori 1`
*   `a >= b`: `slt[u] ; xori 1`
*   `a == 0`: `sltu x0`
*   `a != 0`: `sltiu 1`
*   `a == b`: `sub ; sltu x0`
*   `a != b`: `sub ; sltiu 1`

## [](#shift-instructions)Shift instructions

There is no way I can do justice to the usage of bit shifts in the middle of a tutorial on RISC-V assembly. If you’re here, you’ve probably heard of them. There’s nothing really special to the way they appear in usage for RISC-V.

There are two variants for right shifting: _`srl`_ and _`srli`_ (“shift right logical (immediate)”) performs “logical” or unsigned right shift where the leftmost or most significant bits are filled with zeros.

_`sra`_ and _`srai`_ (“shift right arithmetic (immediate)”) performs “arithmetic” or signed right shift where the leftmost bits are filled with the same of what highest/sign bit was. So if you shift a negative value, you get a negative result; if you shift a non-negative value, you get a non-negative result.

```
srl rd, rs1, rs2
sra rd, rs1, rs2
srli rd, rs1, imm
srai rd, rs1, imm
```

As before, the ones with the `i` suffix take an immediate value as the second operand, and the ones without `i` take a register.

li x10, -3 srai x11, x10, 16 srli x12, x10, 16 ebreak

So `a` means “arithmetic”, `l` means “logical”. Got it.

Left shifts have no such distinction. For consistency they are still “logical”: _`sll`_ is left shift, and _`slli`_ is left shift with immediate.

```
sll rd, rs1, rs2
slli rd, rs1, imm
```

Aha, now we can blow up `0x123` without repeating myself so much:

li x10, 0x123 slli x10, x10, 10 slli x10, x10, 10 slli x10, x10, 10 ebreak

The immediate value for shift instructions are special: they can only be in the range of 0 to 31, inclusive, because it doesn’t make sense to shift by a negative amount, or by more than 31. When the shift amount is taken from a register, the value is considered modulo 32, or in other words only the last 5 bits are taken into account:

li x10, 0x444 li x11, 0x81 srl x10, x10, x11 # Same as shifting by 1 ebreak

For some fun, let’s try multiplying a value by 10, something you would do when parsing decimal numbers: `a * 10` can be rewritten as `(a << 1) + (a << 3)`:

li x10, 0x5 slli x11, x10, 1 slli x12, x10, 3 add x11, x11, x12 ebreak

## [](#thats-it)That’s it…?

That’s it?

You may have noticed some glaring omissions. What we’ve learned doesn’t even cover grade school math: multiplication and division are missing.

RISC-V is designed with _extensions_ in mind. Remember that as said in the introduction, RV32I is the barest bones of the barest bones we’ve got. Forcing everyone to make their processors with multiplication and division even for tasks that don’t need them would waste silicon area and money on every chip. Instead those making RISC-V processors have great freedom to choose, and indeed some would say they have too much freedom.

For us… Honestly, I’m just glad we’ve been dealt a hand that we can tackle completely in full. There’s no way I’m finishing writing this tutorial if RV32I wasn’t so bare boned.

## [](#summary-of-computational-instructions)Summary of computational instructions

(Operand `a` is `rs1`, and `b` is `rs2` or immediate. In the instruction name `[i]` means an immediate variant is available. Subscript `u` means unsigned and `s` means two’s complement signed.)

  

Instruction

Operation

Immediate range

`add[i]`

`a + b`

`[-2048, 2047]`

`sub`

`a - b`

(n/a)

`slt[i]`

`(a <s b) ? 1 : 0`

`[-2048, 2047]`

`slt[i]u`

`(a <u b) ? 1 : 0`

`[-2048, 2047]`

`xor[i]`

`a ^ b`

`[-2048, 2047]`

`or[i]`

`a | b`

`[-2048, 2047]`

`and[i]`

`a & b`

`[-2048, 2047]`

`sll[i]`

`a << b`

`[0, 31]`

`srl[i]`

`a >>u b`

`[0, 31]`

`sra[i]`

`a >>s b`

`[0, 31]`

# [](#intermission-larger-numbers)Intermission: Larger numbers

The `addi` instruction has limit on the immediate value. How do we make bigger values?

The _`lui`_ (“load upper immediate”) instruction takes an immediate in the range `[0, 1048575]` (i.e. up to `220 - 1`) and sets `rd` to that value left shifted 12 bits:

```
lui rd, imm20
```

That was… slightly confusing. Why don’t we give it a try:

lui x10, 1 lui x11, 2 ebreak

Instead of `li` loading a “low” immediate, we control the _upper_ 20 bits of what we put in the register. After that, we can use another `addi` instruction to fill in the lower bits. For example, if we want `0x12345`:

lui x10, 0x12 addi x10, x10, 0x345 ebreak

For convenience, in assembly you can use _`%hi()`_ and _`%lo()`_ to extract the, well, high 20 and low 10 bits of a value. The previous example could also be written:

lui x10, %hi(0x12345) addi x10, x10, %lo(0x12345) ebreak

Letting `lui` handle the high 20 bits, and `addi` for the low 12 bits, you can make any 32-bit value.

(A small complication arises if you want to use values with bit 11 set. In that case, the immediate operand to `addi` will have to be negative. However `%hi` understands this and adds one to compensate, so this `%hi`/`%lo` combination does work for everything.)

# [](#jumps-and-branches)Jumps and branches

So far, everything that we’ve had so far can be done on even the most basic programmer’s calculator. To truly make a computer… do computer stuff, we’d want loops and conditionals.

In RISC-V parlance, a _branch_ is a conditional transfer of control flow, and a _jump_ is an unconditional transfer of control flow.

I think the branch instructions are slightly simpler, so let’s start with those.

## [](#branches)Branches

All the branch instruction follow the form “If some comparison, go to somewhere.” The conditions are:

*   _`beq`_: `rs1 == rs2` (“equal”)
*   _`bne`_: `rs1 != rs2` (“not equal”)
*   _`blt`_: `rs1 < rs2` signed (“less than”)
*   _`bge`_: `rs1 >= rs2` signed (“greater or equal”)
*   _`bltu`_: `rs1 < rs2` signed (“less than unsigned”)
*   _`bgeu`_: `rs1 >= rs2` signed (“greater or equal unsigned”)

(In case you’re wondering about the confusing choice of ordering operators here, it’s just that the negation of `<` is `>=`.)

```
beq rs1, rs2, label
bne rs1, rs2, label
blt rs1, rs2, label
bge rs1, rs2, label
bltu rs1, rs2, label
bgeu rs1, rs2, label
```

Oh, right, almost forgot to explain what labels are. Labels are convenience identifiers for addresses at some line of your code. They are some identifier followed by a colon (like `this:`). They can appear on a line of its own, or before any instruction on the line. You can see which address they point to using the “Dump” button. The third operand of a branch instruction is a label to jump to if the condition holds.

Let’s add up all the numbers from 1 to 100:

li x10, 100 # i = 100 li x11, 0 # sum = 0 loop: add x11, x11, x10 # sum = sum + i addi x10, x10, -1 # i = i - 1 blt x0, x10, loop # If i > 0: loop again # Otherwise: done ebreak

You can try your hands on making your favorite loops, like fibonacci numbers or something. Speaking of trying your hands, just so we’re ready, here’s what an infinite loop looks like. Try pausing or stopping the loop, and single stepping through the instructions.

loop: addi x10, x10, 1 add x11, x11, x10 beq x0, x0, loop

(If you know a thing or two about JavaScript in the browser, you’ll know that a real infinite loop in JavaScript makes the whole page becomes unresponsive, unless it’s in a worker or something. The “Run” button here just runs the emulator for a certain number of steps, pausing by giving back control to the event loop in between.)

(This isn’t the preferred way to write an unconditional jump. We’ll see what is later.)

By the way, there’s no `bgt[u]` or `ble[u]` because you can just swap `rs1` and `rs2` to get those.

## [](#jumps)Jumps

There are two jump instructions in RISC-V. One of them is _`jal`_ “jump and link”, which sets `rd` to the address of the following instruction, and then jumps to a label:

```
jal rd, label
```

Another is _`jalr`_ “jump and link register”, which sets `rd` to the address of the following instruction, and then jumps to the address at `imm + rs1`.

```
jalr rd, imm(rs1)
```

(Actually, the address jumped to is `(imm + rs1) & ~1`, i.e. the least significant bit is cleared. This distinction won’t come up in normal code, like, pretty much ever.)

Eesh, that’s some funky looking syntax. When you see parentheses like this, it has something to do with an _address_. Parens means address.

That’s… still a lot going on. Let’s take on some simpler cases first: If `rd` is `x0` then the only thing these instructions do is jumping. We can use it instead of the branch instructions for an unconditional jump.

loop: # Yes this is an infinite loop. # You can see that we execute # this one instruction over and over jal x0, loop

For convenience, a pseudoinstruction is available for you: _`j`_ (“jump”) is for `jal` with `rd` being `x0`:

```
j label
```

As for why you would want to do this… Well, we only have 32 bits per instruction, and since the `jal` instruction only needs one register number instead of the branch instructions’ two, and it doesn’t need a condition, the instruction encoding permits jumping over a longer range. So this is always preferred over something like `beq x0, x0, label` for a jump.

As for `jalr`, you can jump to an address that’s stored in a register. In C, that would be dealing with function pointers. You’d need this any time dynamic dispatch is needed. For example, we load the address of `foo` into a register first before jumping to it.

lui x10, %hi(foo) addi x10, x10, %lo(foo) jalr x0, 0(x10) # This isn't executed li x12, 1 ebreak foo: # This is executed li x12, 2 ebreak

In case you forgot by now, the `lui`/`addi` combo at the start puts the address of the label `foo` in register `x10`.

Similar to `j`, _`jr`_ (“jump register”) is a psuedoinstruction for `jalr` with `rd` being `x0` and `imm` being `0`:

```
jr rs1
```

Hmmm… If I didn’t really need the address in `x10`, that `addi` would be unnecessary, since `jalr` has the ability to add a low immediate on its own:

lui x10, %hi(foo) jalr x0, %lo(foo)(x10) # This isn't executed li x12, 1 ebreak foo: # This is executed li x12, 2 ebreak

What’s the advantage of this over `jal x0`? Since `%hi` and `%lo` can represent any 32-bit value, this two-instruction combo can jump to any address, free from range restrictions. You do need a free scratch register for the high part of the address though, but since RISC-V gives you 31 of them, this shouldn’t be too much of a problem.

## [](#jump-and-link)Jump and link

What’s the deal with the destination register then? What do you need the address of the next instruction for? For jumping _back_ of course. We can use this functionality to call functions and return back.

li x10, 1 jal x1, double # Call double jal x1, double # Call double ebreak # Double the value in x10 double: add x10, x10, x10 jr x1 # Return

Note that I used the register `x1` for this, which is the register for providing the return address by convention. For convenience, if the destination register is omitted in `jal`, it defaults to `x1`. Meanwhile, _`ret`_ (“return”) is a pseudoinstruction that stands for `jr x1`, i.e. `jalr x0, 0(x1)`:

```
jal label
ret
```

So the example above can be rewritten more conveniently as:

li x10, 1 jal foo jal foo ebreak foo: add x10, x10, x10 ret

# [](#memory)Memory

That’s a nice computer we have here. Now we have… all of 31 × 4 = 124 bytes of storage in the form of registers to work with. I want more…

## [](#basic-memory-accesses)Basic memory accesses

The emulator has 1 MiB of memory starting at address `0x4000_0000`. That’s `0x4000_0000` to `0x400f_ffff`, inclusive. The assembler starts assembling at the beginning of memory, as you can see in the dump, starting at address `0x4000_0000`.

The _`.word`_ _directive_ straight up puts a 4-byte/32-bit word into the current position. You can specify multiple values separated by commas.

```
.word value [ , value [ , ...  ] ]
```

The _`lw`_ (“load word”) instruction loads a word from the address `rs1 + imm` and puts it in `rd`, in other words it reads the word from memory:

```
lw rd, imm(rs1)
```

As with `jalr`, you can combine it with `lui` to access any address.

lui x10, %hi(foo) lw x11, %lo(foo)(x10) ebreak foo: # Get it? foo, f00 ... .word 0xf00

The _`sw`_ (“store word”) instruction stores `rs2` to a word in memory at address `rs2 + imm`, in other words it writes the word to memory:

```
sw rs2, imm(rs1)
```

lui x10, %hi(foo) lw x11, %lo(foo)(x10) li x12, 0x123 sw x12, %lo(foo)(x10) # Now it's changed lw x13, %lo(foo)(x10) ebreak foo: .word 0xf00

Just to make absolutely sure we’re clear on this, _load_ means reading from memory, _store_ means writing to memory. Both words can be nouns and verbs. Also, a _word_ is 32-bit for RISC-V.

Let’s have some fun. Can we have the program read itself?

here: lui x10, %hi(here) lw x10, %lo(here)(x10) ebreak

Ohh that’s fun. Does this mean I can also write programs with just `.word`?

.word 0x40000537 # lui x10, %hi(here) .word 0x00052503 # lw x10, %lo(here)(x10) .word 0x00100073 # ebreak

Oh that’s nice. Just a peek into the world of machine code and instruction encodings… which we will not be getting into.

With memory accesses under our belt, we can address a lot more data easily. Here’s an example where we find the sum of all the values in an array. Note how we can access different addresses of memory, whereas there is no way to address a register by a number in another register.

lui x10, %hi(array) addi x10, x10, %lo(array) li x11, 8 # length # Get end address slli x11, x11, 2 add x11, x11, x10 li x12, 0 # sum loop: # If current == end, done beq x10, x11, end lw x13, 0(x10) # Load from array add x12, x12, x13 # Add to sum addi x10, x10, 4 # Bump current pointer j loop end: ebreak array: .word 13, 24, 6, 7, 8, 19, 0, 4

The equivalent in C would be something like

```
uint32_t array[], length;

uint32_t *current = array;
uint32_t *end = array + length;
uint32_t sum = 0;

for (; current != end; current ++) {
    sum += *current;
}
```

Note how adding one to a pointer to word bumps the address by 4, because the addresses are all byte addresses, and one word is four bytes. In C, the compiler handles the multiplier for you, but in assembly you have to remember to do it manually.

## [](#smaller-widths)Smaller widths

Not everything in memory is word sized. You’ve already seen an array, which is multiple-word-sized. There are also stuff smaller than word-sized.

An obvious one is the _byte_, which is, well, 1-byte/8-bit and written `[u]int8_t` in C. In the middle is the _halfword_, which is 2-byte/16-bit and written `[u]int16_t` in C. You can use the directives _`.byte`_ and _`.half`_ respectively for those data types.

```
.byte value [ , value [ , ...  ] ]
.half value [ , value [ , ...  ] ]
```

And just in case you don’t remember those, _`.2byte`_ means the same as `.half`, and _`.4byte`_ means the same as `.word`.

```
.2byte value [ , value [ , ...  ] ] # Same as .half
.4byte value [ , value [ , ...  ] ] # Same as .word
```

There’s a small problem with loading smaller-than-word sized values into word-sized registers: What do you do with the rest of the bits? Obviously the lowest of the bits gets the actual value loaded. There are two most useful ways to fill the upper bits:

*   _zero extension_: The higher bits are filled with zeros
*   _sign extension_: The higher bits are filled with copies of the highest bit of the original value

Zero extension is easy enough. As the name suggests, sign extension has something to do with signed values. It’s what happens when you convert a narrower signed value into a wider one.

(Keeping the rest of the bits unchanged isn’t a good option. It complicates the implementation for processor, especially of modern high performance design, to just write parts of a register. It would be easiest if the new value didn’t depend on the old value.)

For example, the signed byte value `-100` is `0x9c`. Since the highest bit i.e. the sign bit of it is `1`, when we expand it into 32 bits we fill the high 24 bits with one so the new value, `0xffff_ff9c` still represents `-100`. This is sign extension.

If we want to convert the unsigned byte value `156`, still `0x9c`, into an unsigned word, it would have to be `0x0000_009c` to preserve its value.

For bytes, the _`lb`_ (“load byte”) instruction loads a byte and sign extends the result, and the _`lbu`_ (“load byte unsigned”) instruction does the same but zero extends the result. As with `lw`, the address is `rs1 + imm`.

```
lb rd, imm(rs1)
lbu rd, imm(rs1)
```

Similarly for _`lh`_ (“load half”) and _`lhu`_ (“load half unsigned”), just for unsigned halfwords (two bytes each, remember):

```
lh rd, imm(rs1)
lhu rd, imm(rs1)
```

We can try out the sign extension and zero extension example from earlier.

\# Signed li x10, -100 lui x11, %hi(test) lb x11, %lo(test)(x11) # Unsigned li x12, 156 lui x13, %hi(test) lbu x13, %lo(test)(x13) ebreak test: .byte 0x9c

Correspondingly, the _`sb`_ (“store byte”) and _`sh`_ (“store half”) do the opposite of `lb` and `lh`, storing bytes and halfwords to memory. Instead of widening small values to register size, these take the lowest order bits from `rs1` and stores it to memory. (There’s no `sbu` and `shu` because stores are narrowing instead of widening operations.)

```
sb rs2, imm(rs1)
sh rs2, imm(rs1)
```

While we’re at it, here’s two more minor details. Firstly, _endianness_. While theoretically big endian RISC-V machines can exist, I’ve never seen one… and this emulator is little endian, meaning that the four bytes in a word are laid out in memory lowest first. So, `.byte 0x1, 0x2, 0x3, 0x4` would be the same as `.word 0x04030201`.

lui x10, %hi(test) lw x10, %lo(test)(x10) ebreak test: .byte 0x1, 0x2, 0x3, 0x4

Secondly, memory accesses should be _aligned_ for maximum efficiency. This means that the address for a halfword/2byte should be a multiple of two, and the address for a word/4byte should be a multiple of four. Misaligned accesses (meaning, well, when the address is not aligned) may not work as expected.

For user programs running on a rich operating systems, misaligned accesses are supported but may be slow. In embedded application running on microcontrollers and such, it might not work at all.

This emulator supports misaligned memory accesses.

lui x10, %hi(test) addi x10, x10, %lo(test) lw x11, 0(x10) lw x12, 1(x10) lw x13, 3(x10) test: .byte 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8

Now you can try translating some basic C code into RISC-V assembly. Functions are… still out of the question for now. Variables have to be either global or put in registers. What else are we missing…

## [](#memory-mapped-io)Memory-mapped I/O

Is it Hello World time? I think it’s Hello World time…

For a computer to not just be a space heater, we need some way for it to at least generate output and take input. While other architectures may have dedicated I/O instructions, RISC-V uses _memory mapped I/O_. Essentially, this means that loads and stores to special addresses communicate with other _devices_. They do not work like normal memory, and you should only use the supported widths to access them.

One output device we have here is at address `0x1000_0000`. Any 32-bit writes to it appends the lowest 8 bits as a byte to the text in the output pane. In other words, a `sw` to that address writes a byte of output.

(The output pane uses UTF-8 encoding.)

lui x11, %hi(0x10000000) li x10, 0x48 # 'H' sw x10, 0(x11) li x10, 0x69 # 'i' sw x10, 0(x11) li x10, 0x21 # '!' sw x10, 0(x11) li x10, 0x0a # '\\n' sw x10, 0(x11) ebreak

Eh, close enough to greeting the entire world. We could refactor it a bit to use a loop, or whatever… Now that we think about it, how about going one step further and organize our code into some functions?

# [](#functions)Functions

We already know how to call a function and return back. Namely, `jal` calls a function, and `ret` returns. Usually functions take arguments, uses local variables, and returns results. Since there’s no real difference between the 31 general purpose registers, on account of them being, well, general purpose, we could just use any of them as we wish. Usually though, there are some standard conventions to follow

## [](#register-aliases-and-calling-conventions)Register aliases and calling conventions

This whole time you probably have noticed that registers are listed with two names each, and indeed both work identically in assembly.

li x10, 1 li a0, 1 ebreak

These _register aliases_ are named after their uses:

*   _`s0` through `s11`_ are _saved_ registers
*   _`t0` through `t6`_ are _temporary_ registers
*   _`a0` through `a7`_ are _argument_ registers
*   _`zero`_ is the, well, zero register
*   _`ra`_ is for the return address, by convention, as we’ve seen
*   _`sp`_ … we’ll talk about `sp` later
*   (The use of _`tp`_ and _`gp`_ is out of the scope of this document.)

(Yeah it’s… all placed in a weird order. The reason is out of the scope of this tutorial.)

When you call a function, you put up to eight arguments in the… well, argument registers, in the order `a0`, `a1`, …, `a7`. After that you use `jal` or something, which puts the return address in `ra`, and jumps to the function.

Inside, the function, if it wishes to use the _call-saved_ registers `s0` through `s11`, it must save their values at the start of the function, and restore them before returning. The non call-saved registers `a0` through `a7`, `t0` through `t6` and `ra` may be modified without restoring their values.

When the called function is done, it would, as mentioned, restore any used call-saved registers, and jump back to the return address, resuming the calling code.

Here’s a basic-ish example:

```
int memcmp(const void *a, const void *b, size_t n)
```

The parameter `a` is passed in `a0`, `b` is passed in `a1`, and `n` is passed in `a2`. The return value will be in `a0`. Here’s an implementation and test run:

\# memcmp(test1, test2, 4) lui a0, %hi(test1) addi a0, a0, %lo(test1) lui a1, %hi(test2) addi a1, a1, %lo(test2) li a2, 4 jal memcmp ebreak # int memcmp(const void \*a, const void \*b, size\_t n); memcmp: add a3, a0, a2 # a3 = a + n li t0, 0 memcmp\_loop: beq a0, a3, memcmp\_done # No more bytes lb t0, 0(a0) lb t1, 0(a1) sub t0, t0, t1 # t0 = \*a - \*b bne t0, zero, memcmp\_done # If different, done addi a0, a0, 1 # a ++ addi a1, a1, 1 # b ++ j memcmp\_loop memcmp\_done: mv a0, t0 ret test1: .byte 1, 2, 3, 4 test2: .byte 1, 2, 2, 4

Here’s a slightly better-organized “Hello World”, using a `puts` function:

lui a0, %hi(msg) addi a0, a0, %lo(msg) jal puts ebreak # void puts(const char \*); puts: lui t1, %hi(0x10000000) puts\_loop: lb t0, 0(a0) beq t0, zero, puts\_done sw t0, 0(t1) addi a0, a0, 1 j puts\_loop puts\_done: ret msg: .byte 0x48, 0x65, 0x6c, 0x6c, 0x6f, 0x2c, 0x20, 0x77 .byte 0x6f, 0x72, 0x6c, 0x64, 0x21, 0x0a, 0x00

## [](#the-stack)The stack

Although we can write some very basic functions now, there are still a few problems:

*   You can’t call a function within another function because if you do so `ra` would be overwritten, and then you can’t return back from the outer function anymore.
*   We still don’t know how “saving” registers work.

Clearly, both would require using memory somehow. We can feed two birds with one scone by using memory in a structured way: The _stack_.

Unlike some other architectures, the `sp` register is not really special in any way. But just like how we can designate how `a0` is used, we can have some conventions about how `sp` is supposed to be used:

*   The register is call-saved, which means that when you return from a function, `sp` needs to have the same value as when the function was entered
*   `sp` _always_ points to somewhere in an area of memory called the “stack”, and it is _always_ 16-byte aligned.

And, for the stack itself:

*   On RISC-V, the stack grows to lower addresses, meaning that the memory where `address >= sp` are “in the stack”, and `address < sp` are free space that the stack can grow into.
*   Code can allocate space on the stack by decrementing `sp`, and deallocate space by incrementing `sp`. Of course, allocations and deallocations must be balanced properly.
*   You can only freely use space that you have allocated.

An example is in order. Let’s say you have a function `foo` which just calls `bar` twice.

```
void foo() {
    bar();
    bar();
}
```

Inside `foo`, it would need to save the initial `ra`, so it can return back later. Even though `ra` takes only 4 bytes, `sp` needs to be 16-byte aligned at all times, so we round that up to 16 bytes. Decrementing `sp` by 16 we allocate the space:

```
foo:
    addi sp, sp, -16
```

Now, in addition to all of the non call-saved registers, we have 16 bytes of scratch space at `sp` through `sp + 15`. We can backup the value of `ra` here

```
    ...
    sw ra, 0(sp)
```

Then we just call `bar` twice, which overwrites `ra`:

```
    ...
    jal bar
    jal bar
```

At the end of the function, we just need to get back the return address, deallocate the stack space, and return. Although using any register would suffice for the return address, since it is the backed up value of `ra` after all, we load it back to `ra`.

```
    ...
    lw ra, 0(sp)
    addi sp, sp, 16
    ret
```

In a similar way you can save and restore the `s` (remember, call-saved) registers. Usually, the most convenient way to manage this is to put values that need to be preserved across inner function calls in the `s` registers, and then add code at the beginning to save them, and add code at the end to restore them.

Obligatory recursive Fibonacci time!

li a0, 10 jal fib ebreak fib: li t0, 2 # If n < 2, then return n bge a0, t0, fib\_large ret fib\_large: # Otherwise, n >= 2 # Save stuff to stack addi sp, sp, -16 sw ra, 0(sp) sw s0, 4(sp) sw s1, 8(sp) mv s0, a0 # s0 = n addi a0, a0, -1 # a0 = n - 1 jal fib mv s1, a0 # s1 = fib(n - 1) addi a0, s0, -2 jal fib # fib(n - 2) add a0, a0, s1 # Restore stuff from stack and return lw ra, 0(sp) lw s0, 4(sp) lw s1, 8(sp) addi sp, sp, 16 ret

The algorithm should be fairly straightforward:

```
fibonacci(n) {
    if (n < 2) { return n; }
    else { return fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2); }
}
```

What’s worth noting here is the fairly symmetric pattern of saving registers at the start:

```
    addi sp, sp, -16
    sw ra, 0(sp)
    sw s0, 4(sp)
    sw s1, 8(sp)
```

And restoring them at the end:

```
    lw ra, 0(sp)
    lw s0, 4(sp)
    lw s1, 8(sp)
    addi sp, sp, 16
    ret
```

A little thing to also note that the `s` registers are only saved in the more complex branch, where as the simpler branch just returns directly. This is also acceptable from a calling convention perspective.

(Note: In the emulator, the `sp` register is initialized to an address that would be convenient for you for use as a stack, as a, well, convenience.)

# [](#intermission-numeric-labels)Intermission: Numeric labels

Let’s go back to this example:

```
    # void puts(const char *);
puts:
    lui t1, %hi(0x10000000)
puts_loop:
    lb t0, 0(a0)
    beq t0, zero, puts_done
    sw t0, 0(t1)
    addi a0, a0, 1
    j puts_loop

puts_done:
    ret
```

Having to name things like `puts_loop`, `puts_done` is a bit annoying. There’s a shorter way: _numeric labels_.

A numeric label is one with a name of a decimal number. To refer to a numeric label, use the number and a `f` suffix for “forward”, and `b` for “backward”, and it will correspond to the nearest numeric label with that number, searching forwards or backwards, respectively.

So, the `puts` example from earlier can be rewritten:

```
    # void puts(const char *);
puts:
    lui t1, %hi(0x10000000)
1:
    lb t0, 0(a0)
    beq t0, zero, 2f
    sw t0, 0(t1)
    addi a0, a0, 1
    j 1b

2:
    ret
```

Yeah I don’t really like this syntax either, but it is what we’ve got.

# [](#position-independence)Position independence

Remember that oddball instruction I mentioned way back, `auipc`?

I don’t know about your experience, but the first time I saw RISC-V disassembly, this is the one instruction that caught my eye. And this memory has stuck with me ever since. It’s a rather common occurrence in real RISC-V programs, and somehow I’ve been hiding it from you this whole time. If you take a sneak peek at the next section’s title, you’ll see how far we’ve come without `auipc`.

So what does it do?

The _`auipc`_ (“add upper immediate to pc”) instruction is very similar to `lui`. Instead of setting `rd` to `imm20 << 12`, it sets it to `pc + (imm20 << 12)`, where `pc` is the address of the `auipc` instruction itself.

```
auipc rd, imm20
```

It works very similarly to `lui`. You can think of them as a pair: the “base” of `lui` is `0`, whereas the “base” of `auipc` is the address of the `auipc` instruction. So this code:

```
start:
    auipc a0, 3
    addi a0, a0, 4
```

Gives you `0x3004`, whereas this:

```
start:
    auipc a0, 3
    addi a0, a0, 4
```

Gives you `start + 0x3004`.

Why would you need this? On modern systems, it’s often desirable to have machine code that can be moved around in address space. For example, a shared library i.e. dynamically linked library can be loaded into any program, at any address. It would be helpful if the machine code does not need to be patched every time. This is called _position independent code_ (_PIC_).

Some instructions already exhibit position independence. For example, as mentioned earlier when we talked about using `lui` and `jalr` as a pair, the branch instructions and `jal` are encoded, as with all RV32I instructions, into 32-bit instruction words, so they can’t possibly be able to encode every possible address. Instead, the jump destination is `pc` plus some offset (`pc` being, as before, the jump/branch instruction itself), and the offset itself is encoded.

You can see these are three different instructions that jump to itself. Since the offset is `0` in each case, the encoding is the same. Use the “Dump” button to see for yourself.

ebreak test1: j test1 test2: j test2 test3: j test3

The `auipc` instruction allows for very flexible position independence. You can make arbitrary calculations based on the address at which code is located. The immediate-bit operand mirroring `lui` means that it is well suited for two-instruction pairs, just like `lui`. These kind of “`pc` plus something” calculations are known as _pc-relative addressing_.

The syntax for getting the assembler to generate the immediate values for pc-relative addressing a bit arcane but hear me out:

1: auipc a0, %pcrel\_hi(foo) addi a0, a0, %pcrel\_lo(1b) ebreak foo: .word 0x12345

Like `%hi()` and `%lo()`, _`%pcrel_hi()`_ and _`%pcrel_lo()`_ gives you the immediate values needed for pc-relative addressing. You pass the label you want to address to `%pcrel_hi()`, but pass a label to _the `auipc` instruction_ to `%pcrel_lo()`.

Unlike `%lo()`, We need the address of the `auipc` instruction itself to calculate the immediate value, and this is why you need to pass a label to it. You don’t need to write `foo` again, since the assembler will look at the `auipc` instruction and see it’s supposed to be for `foo`.

If you hate writing that, you can also use the convenience pseudoinstruction _`la`_:

```
la rd, label
```

Just like a `lui` + `jalr` pair, an `auipc` + `jalr` can be used to jump to somewhere farther away than one `jal` can reach in position-independent code.

One very common case is to call a function that might not be within reach of `jal`. You can use the pseudoinstruction _`call`_ for that.

```
call label
```

This expands to:

```
1:
    auipc ra, %pcrel_hi(label)
    jalr ra, %pcrel_lo(1b)(ra)
```

Notice how `ra` is used as a temporary register to store the intermediate result, which is immediately overwritten by `jalr`.

In fact, there really isn’t any reason to prefer `lui` over `auipc` when using a label. This is why you if you disassemble a real RISC-V program, you see it everywhere, even in non-position-independent code.

Now would be a good time to take a break, since we’re ready to head into…

# [](#privileged-architecture-fundamentals)Privileged architecture fundamentals

We’re going to write an _extremely_ bare bones operating system.

## [](#privilege-levels)Privilege levels

One of the tasks an operating system performs is to control what programs can and cannot do. On RISC-V, the most basic of this control is implemented using _privilege levels_. RISC-V defines… let’s just say, several privilege levels, but we’re only going to use two here:

*   “_Machine_”, number 3
*   “_User_”, number 0

The lower the privilege level number goes, the less privileged that level is. Higher privilege levels treat lower privilege levels as generally completely unreliable and untrusted, and must isolate themselves from adversarial software and failures of lower privilege levels.

(However, we won’t be talking about all of the features that make this full isolation possible, and the emulator you’ve been seeing does not have enough features for that anyway. Therefore, the operating system we’ll be building will leave itself unprotected in various ways.)

The privilege levels are sometimes called “_modes_” for short. And, if that’s not short enough, we can shorten the level names themselves, ending up with _M-mode_ and _U-mode_. All of the ways to refer to these privilege levels are interchangable.

When a RISC-V machine starts (This is known as “_reset_”), it begins execution in Machine mode. On a typical “embedded” system where only Machine mode and User mode are implemented, execution begins in the initialization code read from flash memory. This code can either perform what needs to be done itself, or it can be an operating system that manages some tasks, each executing in User mode.

The former design is used for simpler programs, and is analogous to the programs we’ve seen and run so far. The latter is more complicated. We’ll see the basics of how to achieve that soon.

## [](#control-and-status-registers-csrs)Control and status registers (CSRs)

The _control and status registers_ (_CSRs_) deal with various features that are in some sense “special”. No I don’t have a better explanation of what “special” means.

Six instructions are available for manipulating CSRs.

```
csrrw rd, csr, rs1
csrrs rd, csr, rs1
csrrc rd, csr, rs1
csrrwi rd, csr, uimm5
csrrsi rd, csr, uimm5
csrrci rd, csr, uimm5
```

To refer to a CSR in these instructions, use its name in assembly code. We’ll get to those in a bit.

The pattern works like this. Each of the instructions _atomically_ reads the old value of the CSR, and writes the new value based on some operation performed on the old value and the last operand. The possible operations are:

*   _`csrrw`_ (“CSR read write”): `{ csr = rs1; rd = csr_old; }`
*   _`csrrs`_ (“CSR read set”): `{ csr = csr | rs1; rd = csr_old; }`
*   _`csrrc`_ (“CSR read clear”): `{ csr = csr & ~rs1; rd = csr_old; }`

Where `&`, `|`, `~` are bitwise “and”, “or”, “not” respectively.

Specifically, note that `rd` and `rs1` can be the same. For example, this instruction swaps the value in `a0` and `mscratch`:

```
csrrw a0, mscratch, a0
```

For the “immediate” variants, instead of a register, they take an “unsigned”/zero-extended 5-bit immediate value, i.e. an immediate value 0 through 31, inclusive. This is represented using `uimm5` in the assembly syntax description. The operation is the same otherwise.

*   _`csrrwi`_ (“CSR read write immediate”): `{ csr = uimm5; rd = csr_old; }`
*   _`csrrsi`_ (“CSR read set immediate”): `{ csr = csr | uimm5; rd = csr_old; }`
*   _`csrrci`_ (“CSR read clear immediate”): `{ csr = csr & ~uimm5; rd = csr_old; }`

The full feature set of these instructions are designed for manipulating bit fields in CSRs, which we will not be doing that much of in this tutorial. Still, this orthogonal design should be fairly intuitive to remember.

CSRs and fields in CSRs do not behave like general purpose registers: Some of them are read/write, some are read-only. Also, invalid values have special behaviors. We will touch on more details as we introduce the individual CSRs themselves, but one thing you may have noticed is that we don’t seem to have read-only CSR instructions. Read-only access is achieved using special cases in the instruction encodings:

*   `csrrs` and `csrrc` do not write to the CSR if `rs1` is `x0` (a.k.a. `zero`) (Note that just the value of `rs1` being 0 is not enough.)
*   `csrrsi` and `csrrci` do not write to the CSR if `uimm5` is 0.

While we’re at it:

*   `csrrw` and `csrrwi` do not read the CSR if `rd` is `x0` (a.k.a. `zero`). (Note that writing to `x0` has no effect anyway, since it’s constant 0.)

(No standard RISC-V CSR is write-only, or has side effects on read.)

As a convenience, the pseudoinstructions _`csrr`_ (“CSR read”) and _`csrw`_ (“CSR write”) are available. `csrw csr, rs1` expands to `csrrw x0, csr, rs1`. Meanwhile, `csrr rd, csr` expands specifically to `csrrs rd, csr, x0`, just so we can agree on an encoding.

```
csrw csr, rs1
csrr rd, csr
```

You may have seen these CSR things if you’ve scrolled down on the register view. Yes, we’re finally getting into those.

## [](#counters)Counters

An example of CSRs is _counters_. Two basic read-only counters are _`cycle`_ and _`instret`_. These counters, well, _count_ the number of “cycles” and “instructions retired”. “Retired” is a technical term basically meaning “successfully completed”.

Since a 32-bit counter will overflow quite fast, on RV32, the counters have “high” counterparts: _`cycleh`_ and _`instreth`_. So, for example, the full cycle counter has 64 bits, with the lower 32 bits in the CSR `cycle` and higher 32 bits in the CSR `cycleh`.

While the emulator is running, scroll down on the register view panel, and on the bottom you’ll see the values of these counters. For convenience, they’re shown combined, so, `cycle = 0x11223344_55667788` means `cycleh` is `0x11223344`, and `cycle` is `0x55667788`.

On real hardware `cycle` is coupled to the clock cycle. In this emulator, every time you press “Step”, it counts as a cycle. When you press “Run” and it starts, well, running, a certain number of cycles happen periodically.

Let’s look at a really simple example:

addi a0, a0, 1 addi a0, a0, 1 addi a0, a0, 1 ebreak

It takes 4 cycles for this program to stop, but `instret` ends up at only 3 because the final `ebreak` instruction never actually completes.

(Do not confuse “retired” with “retried”.)

A program can read its own counters. For example, this fun little program loops until the cycle count is over 1000, assuming the low 32 bits doesn’t overflow before it has time to react:

li t1, 1000 loop: csrr t0, cycle blt t0, t1, loop ebreak

## [](#current-privilege-level)Current privilege level

Technically `cycle` and `instret` are not part of the privileged architecture. The real fun begins _now_.

The emulator shows the current privilege level as `(priv)`. It is in parentheses to remind you of a very important fact:

_There is no CSR for the current privilege level._

In general, it is not possible for a RISC-V program to learn what privilege level it’s in. This is required for the [Popek and Goldberg conditions of virtualization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Popek_and_Goldberg_virtualization_requirements) to work, specifically because being able to read the current privilege level at a lower-than-maximum privilege level would be a “sensitive” but “unprivileged” instruction.

If you’re writing a program for a certain privilege level, you should simply assume that it is correctly being run at that privilege level.

# [](#exceptions)Exceptions

## [](#exception-entry)Exception entry

A fundamental way an operating system does its job is through handling exceptions. In general, _exceptions_ occur when there’s a problem with a specific instruction, and execution cannot continue. For example, since `cycle` is a read-only CSR, writing to it is an illegal instruction:

csrw cycle, x0

Since we have no exception handling in the program, we’ll have to inspect what happened manually in the emulator. Indeed, a lot has happened:

Firstly, this message tells you that an exception happened:

```
[ Exception: Illegal instruction (2) | tval = 0xc0001073, epc = 0x4000000c ]
```

The same information is now also available in the CSRs, as follows:

*   _`mcause`_ (“M-mode trap cause”): The kind of exception.
*   _`mepc`_ (“M-mode exception pc”): The address of the instruction that caused the exception.
*   _`mtval`_ (“M-mode trap value”): Extra information about the exception.
*   _`mstatus`_ (“M-mode status”): It is set to `0x00001800`. The two bits in the middle, `mstatus[12:11]` (In C syntax, `(mstatus >> 11) & 0x3`) is the `mstatus.MPP` (“M-mode previous privilege level”) field, which contains 3, meaning that the exception occurred while running in Machine mode.

When an exception happens, in addition to recording the exception information in these CSR fields, `pc` is set to `mtvec`, which is supposed to be the handler address. Let’s write ourselves an exception handler that simply prints a message and stops the emulator, and see the handling in action:

la t0, handler csrw mtvec, t0 # Now cause an exception csrw cycle, x0 # Rest of the main program is never executed addi a0, a0, 1 addi a0, a0, 1 handler: la a0, msg call puts ebreak msg: .byte 0x4f, 0x68, 0x20, 0x6e, 0x6f, 0x21, 0x0a, 0x00 # void puts(const char \*); puts: lui t1, %hi(0x10000000) 1: lb t0, 0(a0) beq t0, zero, 2f sw t0, 0(t1) addi a0, a0, 1 j 1b 2: ret

Yeah it just prints `Oh no!` on error. Baby steps…

The checkboxes “Pause on exc.” and “Print on exc.” control whether the emulator should pause or print a message, respectively, when an exception occurs. You can uncheck those if you want the exception handler set in the program to run without interference.

(Another case that will cause a jump to `mtvec` is _interrupts_. However, this feature does not exist in the emulator. The two cases are collectively called _traps_.)

## [](#exception-causes)Exception causes

These are the exceptions possible in this emulator, and their respective numeric codes:

Description

0

Instruction address misaligned

1

Instruction access fault

2

Illegal instruction

3

Breakpoint

5

Load access fault

7

Store/AMO access fault

8

Environment call from User mode

11

Environment call from Machine mode

“Instruction address misaligned” happens when attempting to jump to an instruction that is not 4-byte aligned. The exception happens on the jump or branch instruction, not the target.

“Load access fault” and “Store/AMO access fault” happens when accessing an invalid memory address, or accessing a memory address in an invalid way.

(“AMO” stands for “atomic memory operation”, which we will not talk about and is not featured in the emulator.)

“Illegal instruction” happens not only in the self explanatory way when an invalid instruction is executed, but also when accessing a CSR in an invalid way, or from too low a privilege level.

“Breakpoint”, “Environment call from User mode” and “Environment call from Machine mode” will be explained in a future section.

## [](#exception-return)Exception return

The _`mret`_ (“M-mode return”) instruction performs the reverse of part of what happens when an exception occurs. To be precise, what happens is:

*   The current privilege levels is set back to `mstatus.MPP`
*   `mstatus.MPP` is set to 0
*   `pc` is set to `mepc`

(You can think of the privilege mode bits as shifting in a chain `0 → MPP → priv`. And, to be even more precise, `mstatus.MPP` is set to the lowest supported privilege mode since it’s not supposed to contain unsupported modes.)

`mret` takes no operands, so the assembly syntax is simply:

```
mret
```

If we do `mret` after getting an exception, then we simply go back to retrying the same instruction again. This is useful for more featureful implementations, where for example, after handling a page fault the correct course of action is to retry the faulting instruction.

However, `mstatus` and `mepc` are also writable. This gives us more flexibility in the use of `mret`. As an analogy, the same `jr` instruction (really `jalr` instruction) can be used to return from a call, and also can be used to jump to any address. Similarly, `mret` not only lets us return from an exception, but also lets us jump to any address _and_ switch to any privilege level.

# [](#handling-user-mode)Handling User mode

## [](#entering-user-mode)Entering User mode

Even though `mret` is named “return”, it is in fact the only way to lower the privilege level to _enter_ User mode. Here’s an example of entering User mode, with a User mode program that does something bad:

la t0, handler csrw mtvec, t0 lui t0, %hi(0x1800) addi t0, t0, %lo(0x1800) # Clear MPP to 0 csrrc zero, mstatus, t0 la t0, user\_entry csrw mepc, t0 mret handler: ebreak # Just stop the emulator user\_entry: # Try to access an M-mode CSR csrr a0, mstatus

As you can see, after we enter User mode, all of the CSRs used for exception handling become completely inaccessible, not even readable. As with writing a read-only CSR, accessing an CSR without permission also causes an illegal instruction exception.

Moreover, when an exception happens, we go back to Machine mode, so the exception handler runs in Machine mode. Here the handler does nothing except stopping the emulator.

## [](#intentionally-causing-an-exception)Intentionally causing an exception

Sometimes, a program may wish to intentionally cause an exception. There are several well-defined way to do that:

*   The pseudoinstruction _`unimp`_ has the same encoding as `csrrw zero, cycle, zero`, and it is the canonical RV32I illegal instruction. It causes causes an “Illegal instruction” exception.
*   The instruction _`ebreak`_ causes a “Breakpoint” exception
*   The instruction _`ecall`_ causes an “Environment call from User mode” exception when executed in User mode, and “Environment call from Machine mode” exception when executed in Machine mode.

Give those exceptions a try here:

la t0, handler csrw mtvec, t0 lui t0, %hi(0x1800) addi t0, t0, %lo(0x1800) # Clear MPP to 0 csrrc zero, mstatus, t0 la t0, user\_entry csrw mepc, t0 mret handler: ebreak # Just stop the emulator user\_entry: ebreak # ecall # unimp

As the names suggest, `ebreak` is used for debugging breakpoints. As a special case, in this emulator `ebreak` in Machine mode stops the emulator. You can think of it as the emulator being a debugger, and the debugger catching the breakpoint.

`unimp` can be used to intentionally crash a program upon detection of some unrecoverable error.

Meanwhile, `ecall` is used for things like system calls. “Environment call from User mode” is a distinct exception cause code to make it easy to check specifically for this case.

## [](#saving-and-restoring-all-registers)Saving and restoring all registers

One thing that you would want in your trap handler is to not trust or disturb _any_ general purpose registers in the code that the trap occurred in, unless you intentionally want to do so, for example to return a value from a system call. So you’d want to save all the registers to memory, before doing anything else. However, accessing memory requires a general purpose register.

The _`mscratch`_ (“M-mode scratch”) CSR can help with this. This register, unlike all the others, have no special functionality. It can hold any 32-bit value. However, like all the other M-mode CSRs, it can only be accessed in Machine mode. User mode code cannot change the value of it.

So for example, you can stash the operating system stack pointer in `mscratch` before switching to User mode, and it will stay in `mscratch` untouched in User mode. At the top of the handler, `csrrw sp, mscratch, sp` to swap from the user stack pointer to the operating system stack pointer.

```
handler:
    csrrw sp, mscratch, sp
    # Save registers except sp
    csrr t0, mscratch
    # t0 = user sp, save it
    # Save user pc
    ...
```

And, to restore:

```
    lw t0, ... # Load user pc
    csrw mepc, t0
    lw t0, ... # Load user sp
    csrw mscratch, t0
    # Restore registers except sp
    csrrw sp, mscratch, sp
    mret
```

We’ll see the full code for this in the following section.

# [](#writing-a-very-very-bare-bones-operating-system)Writing a very very bare bones operating system

## [](#design)Design

We have enough of to write a very very bare bones operating system. It will support these features:

*   System calls:
    *   `a7 = 1`: putchar, `a0` is the byte to write
    *   `a7 = 2`: exit
*   Exception handling: Print error message and exit

We design the exception handling as follows:

*   During most of the time in M-mode, `mscratch` is 0.
*   While in U-mode, `mscratch` points to the operating system stack pointer
*   At trap handler, if `mscratch` is 0, the exception came from M-mode, which we cannot handle, so we report a fatal exception.
*   If it did come from U-mode, allocate 128 bytes on the stack to save the U-mode registers, and call `trap_main`, which manipulates U-mode registers in memory
*   After `trap_main`, we restore registers from memory, deallocate the space from the stack, and go back to U-mode, as outlined in the previous section.

The structure to save registers in is fairly simple:

```
struct regs {
  unsigned long pc;
  unsigned long ra; // x1
  unsigned long sp; // x2
  ...
  unsigned long t6; // x31
};
```

Basically you can think of it as an array where element 0 is `pc`, and elements 1 through 31 are registers x1 through x31.

Inside `trap_main`, we check `mcause` to see if it’s a system call. If it is, we dispatch based on `a7`. If it’s not, we report an exception from U-mode.

At the beginning, we simply initialize the `struct regs` structure on stack, initialize user `sp` and `pc` in it, and jump to the same code that handles returning to U-mode.

## [](#code)Code

Here’s the assembly code with User mode code at the bottom. You may want to uncheck “Pause on exc.” and “Print on exc.” for convenience.

Do not be too hard on yourself if you have trouble understanding the code fully. This is, after all, a fairly complete OS kernel entry and exit implementation. Really, the most important part I’m showing you here is that it is possible.

\# Reserve 256 bytes for OS stack # User stack starts 256 bytes lower addi t2, sp, -256 la t0, handler csrw mtvec, t0 # Prepare struct reg addi sp, sp, -128 mv a0, sp # struct regs \* # Set user pc to user\_entry la t0, user\_entry sw t0, 0(a0) # Set user sp sw t2, 8(a0) j enter\_user # void trap\_main(struct regs \*regs) trap\_main: # Save regs based on calling convention addi sp, sp, -16 sw s0, (sp) sw ra, 4(sp) mv s0, a0 csrr a1, mcause li t1, 8 # "Environment call from User mode" bne a1, t1, do\_bad\_exception # Not ecall, that's bad # Call do\_syscall with args from ecall lw a0, 40(s0) lw a1, 44(s0) lw a2, 48(s0) lw a3, 52(s0) lw a4, 56(s0) lw a5, 60(s0) lw a6, 64(s0) lw a7, 68(s0) call do\_syscall sw a0, 40(s0) # Set user a0 return value # Bump user pc by 4 # Skip over ecall instruction lw t0, 0(s0) addi t0, t0, 4 sw t0, 0(s0) # Restore regs based on calling convention lw s0, (sp) lw ra, 4(sp) addi sp, sp, 16 ret # a0 = arg0, a7 = syscall number do\_syscall: # Dispatch based on syscall number li t0, 1 beq a7, t0, sys\_putchar li t0, 2 beq a7, t0, sys\_exit # Bad syscall li a0, -1 ret # int sys\_putchar(char c) sys\_putchar: # Save regs based on calling convention addi sp, sp, -16 sw s0, (sp) sw ra, 4(sp) call kputchar li a0, 0 # Restore regs based on calling convention lw s0, (sp) lw ra, 4(sp) addi sp, sp, 16 ret # \[\[noreturn\]\] void sys\_exit() sys\_exit: # Just stop the emulator ebreak # \[\[noreturn\]\] void do\_bad\_exception(struct regs \*regs, long cause) # Print message about bad U-mode exception, then stop do\_bad\_exception: mv s0, a1 # Equivalent of printf("Exception 0x%x", cause); la a0, msg\_exception call kputs mv a0, s0 la t0, hex\_chars add t0, t0, a0 lbu a0, (t0) call kputchar li a0, 0xa # '\\n' call kputchar # Stop the emulator ebreak fatal: # Print message about fatal exception, then stop la a0, msg\_fatal call kputs ebreak msg\_exception: # "Exception 0x" .byte 0x45, 0x78, 0x63, 0x65, 0x70, 0x74, 0x69, 0x6f, 0x6e, 0x20, 0x30, 0x78, 0x00 msg\_fatal: # "Fatal exception\\n" .byte 0x46, 0x61, 0x74, 0x61, 0x6c, 0x20, 0x65, 0x78, 0x63, 0x65, 0x70, 0x74, 0x69, 0x6f, 0x6e, 0x0a, 0x00 hex\_chars: # "0123456789abcdef" .byte 0x30, 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 0x34, 0x35, 0x36, 0x37, 0x38, 0x39, 0x61, 0x62, 0x63, 0x64, 0x65, 0x66, 0x00 .byte 0x00 # Alignment padding # Otherwise, the next instruction wouldn't be aligned # void kputs(const char \*); # Print string by accessing MMIO directly kputs: lui t1, %hi(0x10000000) 1: lb t0, 0(a0) beq t0, zero, 2f sw t0, 0(t1) addi a0, a0, 1 j 1b 2: ret # void kputchar(char); # Print byte by accessing MMIO directly kputchar: lui t1, %hi(0x10000000) sw a0, (t1) ret # The big exception handler handler: csrrw sp, mscratch, sp # If mscratch was 0, this is exception from M-mode # Can't handle that, it's a fatal error beq sp, zero, fatal # Save all registers addi sp, sp, -128 sw x1, 4(sp) # x2/sp handled separately sw x3, 12(sp) sw x4, 16(sp) sw x5, 20(sp) sw x6, 24(sp) sw x7, 28(sp) sw x8, 32(sp) sw x9, 36(sp) sw x10, 40(sp) sw x11, 44(sp) sw x12, 48(sp) sw x13, 52(sp) sw x14, 56(sp) sw x15, 60(sp) sw x16, 64(sp) sw x17, 68(sp) sw x18, 72(sp) sw x19, 76(sp) sw x20, 80(sp) sw x21, 84(sp) sw x22, 88(sp) sw x23, 92(sp) sw x24, 96(sp) sw x25, 100(sp) sw x26, 104(sp) sw x27, 108(sp) sw x28, 112(sp) sw x29, 116(sp) sw x30, 120(sp) sw x31, 124(sp) # Save user sp, also set mscratch to 0 in M-mode csrrw t0, mscratch, zero sw t0, 8(sp) # Save user pc csrr t0, mepc sw t0, 0(sp) mv a0, sp call trap\_main # ... falls through after trap\_main ... enter\_user: # Set mstatus.MPP = User lui t0, %hi(0x1800) addi t0, t0, %lo(0x1800) csrrc zero, mstatus, t0 # Set mepc = user pc # Will actually jump with mret lw t0, 0(sp) csrw mepc, t0 # Set mscratch = user sp temporarily # Will swap right before mret lw t0, 8(sp) csrw mscratch, t0 # Restore other registers from stack lw x1, 4(sp) # x2/sp handled separately lw x3, 12(sp) lw x4, 16(sp) lw x5, 20(sp) lw x6, 24(sp) lw x7, 28(sp) lw x8, 32(sp) lw x9, 36(sp) lw x10, 40(sp) lw x11, 44(sp) lw x12, 48(sp) lw x13, 52(sp) lw x14, 56(sp) lw x15, 60(sp) lw x16, 64(sp) lw x17, 68(sp) lw x18, 72(sp) lw x19, 76(sp) lw x20, 80(sp) lw x21, 84(sp) lw x22, 88(sp) lw x23, 92(sp) lw x24, 96(sp) lw x25, 100(sp) lw x26, 104(sp) lw x27, 108(sp) lw x28, 112(sp) lw x29, 116(sp) lw x30, 120(sp) lw x31, 124(sp) addi sp, sp, 128 # Actually restore sp csrrw sp, mscratch, sp mret # Time to go to user mode! ################ user\_entry: la a0, msg\_hello call puts call exit # void puts(const char \*); # Print string using system call puts: addi sp, sp, -16 sw s0, (sp) sw ra, 4(sp) mv s0, a0 1: lb a0, 0(s0) beq a0, zero, 2f call putchar addi s0, s0, 1 j 1b 2: lw s0, (sp) lw ra, 4(sp) addi sp, sp, 16 ret # void putchar(const char \*); # Print byte using system call putchar: li a7, 1 ecall ret # \[\[noreturn\]\] void exit(); exit: li a7, 2 ecall # Not supposed to return, just to be safe unimp msg\_hello: .byte 0x48, 0x65, 0x6c, 0x6c, 0x6f, 0x20, 0x77, 0x6f, 0x72, 0x6c, 0x64, 0x21, 0x0a, 0x00

## [](#pseudocode-reference)Pseudocode reference

For reference, here’s some of the OS code in pseudo-C.

```
void trap_main(struct regs *regs) {
    unsigned long cause = csr_read(mcause);
    if (cause != 8)
        do_bad_exception(regs, cause);

    # Call do_syscall with args from ecall
    unsigned long ret = do_syscall(regs->a0, ..., regs->a7);
    regs->a0 = ret;

    // Bump user pc by 4, skip over ecall instruction
    regs->pc += 4;
}

unsigned long do_syscall(
    unsigned long a0,
    ...,
    unsigned long a7
) {
    if (a7 == 1)
        sys_putchar(a0);
    else if (a7 == 8)
        sys_exit();
    else
        return -1;
}

unsigned long sys_putchar(char a) {
    kputchar(a);
    return 0;
}

[[noreturn]]
unsigned long sys_exit(char a) {
    ebreak();
}

[[noreturn]]
void do_bad_exception(struct regs *regs, unsigned long cause) {
    kputs("Exception 0x");
    kputchar(hex_chars[cause]);
    kputchar('\n');
    ebreak();
}

[[noreturn]]
void fatal() {
    kputs("Fatal exception\n");
    ebreak();
}

void kputs(const char *str) {
    while (*str) {
        u32 val = (u32)*str;
        writel(0x10000000, val); // MMIO write
        str ++;
    }
}

void kputchar(char c) {
    u32 val = (u32)c;
    writel(0x10000000, val); // MMIO write
}
```

And here’s the user code, again in pseudo C:

```
[[noreturn]]
void user_entry() {
    puts(...);
    exit();
}

void puts(const char *str) {
    while (*str) {
        putchar(*str);
        str ++;
    }
}

void putchar(char c) {
    ecall(a0 = c, a7 = 1);
}

void exit() {
    ecall(a7 = 2);
}
```

# [](#lies-and-omissions)Lies and omissions

As long as this tutorial is, some simplifications have been made. Here are some of the most egregious lies and omissions, compared to the “real” RISC-V architecture and “real” RISC-V assembly code found in the world:

*   The assembly syntax resembles the syntax used by LLVM assembler and GNU Binutils for RISC-V. However, it is not identical.
*   There are a lot more pseudoinstructions and CSRs than what I have described.
*   The `li` pseudoinstruction should support a wider range of constants.
*   `mstatus` is a lot more complicated than what I have described.
*   `%hi`, `%lo`, `%pcrel_hi`, `%pcrel_lo` are more complicated than what I have described.

There are also very important topics that are common or even ubiquitous in the RISC-V world, but I chose not to cover:

*   64-bit architecture
*   Compressed instructions
*   Other privileged architecture and operating systems topics: Interrupts, memory protection, virtual memory, …

However, what I’ve taught you should be more than enough to get you started into learning more on your own, or with further materials.

# [](#references)References

Here are some references and tutorials I would personally recommend, if you’re looking to get further into RISC-V low-level development

*   RISC-V Instruction Set Manual [https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual)
*   RISC-V Assembly Programmer’s Manual [https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-asm-manual](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-asm-manual)
*   RISC-V Calling Conventions [https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/blob/master/riscv-cc.adoc](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/blob/master/riscv-cc.adoc)
*   Operating System in 1,000 Lines [https://operating-system-in-1000-lines.vercel.app/en/](https://operating-system-in-1000-lines.vercel.app/en/)

Other useful resources that I have used while writing this tutorial:

*   `arch/riscv/kernel/entry.S` from Linux [https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/arch/riscv/kernel/entry.S](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/arch/riscv/kernel/entry.S)

# [](#thanks)Thanks

Thanks to these folks for UI design help and content suggestions:

*   Aria Desires [https://faultlore.com](https://faultlore.com)
*   Riven Skaye [https://skaye.blog](https://skaye.blog)
*   robotreader [https://sdubinsky.com](https://sdubinsky.com)
*   Bruce Hoult [http://hoult.org/bruce](http://hoult.org/bruce)

And thanks to you for coming along with me on this journey. Come on over to [https://github.com/dramforever/easyriscv](https://github.com/dramforever/easyriscv) if you have suggestions, grievances, or just want to share some thoughts.

# [](#license)License

This tutorial is under the [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license. To the maximum extent permitted by law, this tutorial is dedicated to the public domain.

# [](#index)Index

## [](#instructions)Instructions

*   [`add`](#insn-add)
*   [`addi`](#insn-addi)
*   [`and`](#insn-and)
*   [`andi`](#insn-andi)
*   [`auipc`](#insn-auipc)
*   [`beq`](#insn-beq)
*   [`bge`](#insn-bge)
*   [`bgeu`](#insn-bgeu)
*   [`blt`](#insn-blt)
*   [`bltu`](#insn-bltu)
*   [`bne`](#insn-bne)
*   [`call`](#insn-call)
*   [`csrr`](#insn-csrr)
*   [`csrrc`](#insn-csrrc)
*   [`csrrci`](#insn-csrrci)
*   [`csrrs`](#insn-csrrs)
*   [`csrrsi`](#insn-csrrsi)
*   [`csrrw`](#insn-csrrw)
*   [`csrrwi`](#insn-csrrwi)
*   [`csrw`](#insn-csrw)
*   [`ebreak`](#insn-ebreak)
*   [`ecall`](#insn-ecall)
*   [`j`](#insn-j)
*   [`jal`](#insn-jal)
*   [`jalr`](#insn-jalr)
*   [`jr`](#insn-jr)
*   [`la`](#insn-la)
*   [`lb`](#insn-lb)
*   [`lbu`](#insn-lbu)
*   [`lh`](#insn-lh)
*   [`lhu`](#insn-lhu)
*   [`li`](#insn-li)
*   [`lui`](#insn-lui)
*   [`lw`](#insn-lw)
*   [`mret`](#insn-mret)
*   [`mv`](#insn-mv)
*   [`or`](#insn-or)
*   [`ori`](#insn-ori)
*   [`ret`](#insn-ret)
*   [`sb`](#insn-sb)
*   [`sh`](#insn-sh)
*   [`sll`](#insn-sll)
*   [`slli`](#insn-slli)
*   [`slt`](#insn-slt)
*   [`slti`](#insn-slti)
*   [`sltiu`](#insn-sltiu)
*   [`sltu`](#insn-sltu)
*   [`sra`](#insn-sra)
*   [`srai`](#insn-srai)
*   [`srl`](#insn-srl)
*   [`srli`](#insn-srli)
*   [`sub`](#insn-sub)
*   [`sw`](#insn-sw)
*   [`unimp`](#insn-unimp)
*   [`xor`](#insn-xor)
*   [`xori`](#insn-xori)

## [](#registers-and-csrs)Registers and CSRs

*   [`x0`](#reg-x0)
*   [`x1` through `x31`](#reg-x1-through-x31)

*   [`a0` through `a7`](#regalias-a0-through-a7)
*   [`gp`](#regalias-gp)
*   [`ra`](#regalias-ra)
*   [`s0` through `s11`](#regalias-s0-through-s11)
*   [`sp`](#regalias-sp)
*   [`t0` through `t6`](#regalias-t0-through-t6)
*   [`tp`](#regalias-tp)
*   [`zero`](#regalias-zero)

*   [`cycle`](#csr-cycle)
*   [`cycleh`](#csr-cycleh)
*   [`instret`](#csr-instret)
*   [`instreth`](#csr-instreth)
*   [`mcause`](#csr-mcause)
*   [`mepc`](#csr-mepc)
*   [`mscratch`](#csr-mscratch)
*   [`mstatus`](#csr-mstatus)
*   [`mtval`](#csr-mtval)

## [](#special-assembly-syntax)Special assembly syntax

*   [`.2byte`](#dir-.2byte)
*   [`.4byte`](#dir-.4byte)
*   [`.byte`](#dir-.byte)
*   [`.half`](#dir-.half)
*   [`.word`](#dir-.word)

*   [`%hi()`](#rel-%hi\(\))
*   [`%lo()`](#rel-%lo\(\))
*   [`%pcrel_hi()`](#rel-%pcrel_hi\(\))
*   [`%pcrel_lo()`](#rel-%pcrel_lo\(\))

## [](#other-terms)Other terms

*   [align](#term-align)
*   [aligned](#term-aligned)
*   [branch](#term-branch)
*   [byte](#term-byte)
*   [call-saved](#term-call-saved)
*   [control and status registers](#term-control-and-status-registers)
*   [counters](#term-counters)
*   [CSRs](#term-csrs)
*   [destination register](#term-destination-register)
*   [devices](#term-devices)
*   [directive](#term-directive)
*   [endianness](#term-endianness)
*   [exceptions](#term-exceptions)
*   [extensions](#term-extensions)
*   [general purpose registers](#term-general-purpose-registers)
*   [halfword](#term-halfword)
*   [`imm`](#term-imm)
*   [immediate value](#term-immediate-value)
*   [instruction syntax](#term-instruction-syntax)
*   [interrupts](#term-interrupts)
*   [jump](#term-jump)
*   [load](#term-load)
*   [M-mode](#term-m-mode)
*   [Machine](#term-machine)
*   [memory mapped I/O](#term-memory-mapped-i/o)
*   [modes](#term-modes)
*   [numeric labels](#term-numeric-labels)
*   [`pc`](#term-pc)
*   [pc-relative addressing](#term-pc-relative-addressing)
*   [PIC](#term-pic)
*   [position independent code](#term-position-independent-code)
*   [privilege levels](#term-privilege-levels)
*   [program counter](#term-program-counter)
*   [pseudoinstructions](#term-pseudoinstructions)
*   [`rd`](#term-rd)
*   [register aliases](#term-register-aliases)
*   [reset](#term-reset)
*   [`rs1`](#term-rs1)
*   [`rs2`](#term-rs2)
*   [sign extension](#term-sign-extension)
*   [source register](#term-source-register)
*   [stack](#term-stack)
*   [store](#term-store)
*   [traps](#term-traps)
*   [two’s complement](#term-two’s-complement)
*   [U-mode](#term-u-mode)
*   [User](#term-user)
*   [word](#term-word)
*   [zero extension](#term-zero-extension)