Geometry and Physics of Wrinkling E. Cerda 1,2 and L. Mahadevan 1, * 1 Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Silver Street, Cambridge CB3 9EW, United Kingdom 2 Departamento de Fı  ́ sica, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Avenida  Ecuador 3493, Casilla 307, Correo 2, Santiago, Chile (Received 25 June 2002; published 19 February 2003) The wrinkling of thin elastic sheets occurs over a range of length scales, from the fine scale patterns in substrates on which cells crawl to the coarse wrinkles seen in clothes. Motivated by the wrinkling of a  stretched  elastic  sheet,  we  deduce  a  general  theory  of  wrinkling,  valid  far  from  the  onset  of  the instability, using elementary geometry and the physics of  bending and stretching. Our main result is a set of simple scaling laws; the wavelength of the wrinklesK 1=4 , whereKis the stiffness due to an ‘‘elastic substrate’’ effect with a  multitude of origins, and the amplitude of the wrinkleA. These could  form the basis of a  highly sensitive quantitative wrinkling assay for  the mechanical character- ization of thin solid membranes.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.074302PACS numbers:  46.32.+x,  46.70.De,  47.54.+r The depiction of wrinkles in art is as old as the subject itself. However, the scientific study of wrinkles is a much more recent subject as it involves the large deformations of naturally thin flat sheets whose behavior is governed by a set of nonlinear partial differential equations, known as the Fo  ̈ ppl–von Karman equations [1]. They are essentially impossible  to  solve  in  analytical  form  except  in  some one-dimensional cases, so that one has to resort to either computations or a semianalytical approach using scaling and  asymptotic  arguments  to  make  progress.  Here,  we use  the  latter  approach  to  quantify  the  wrinkling  of  a thin  elastic  sheet  which  deforms  under  the  influence  of external  forces  and/or  geometrical  constraints.  Our  re- sults  complement  those  of  classical  tension-field  theory [2 – 4],  which  focuses  on  the  much  simpler  problem  of determining  the  location  of  the  wrinkles  by  using  the linearized  in-plane  elastic  response  and  neglecting  the bending resistance of the sheet.
To  illustrate  the  main  ideas,  we  consider  a  simple example of wrinkling seen in a stretched, slender elastic sheet  cut out of a polyethylene sheet. This must be con- trasted with the crumpling of the same sheet [5,6], where the  sheet  responds  by  bending  almost  everywhere,  and stretching  is  limited  to  a  few  boundary  layers  in  the vicinity of peaks and ridges. When such a thin isotropic elastic  sheet  of  thicknesst,  widthW,  lengthL(t WL)  made  of  a  material  with  Young’s  modulusE and Poisson’s ratio	is subject to a longitudinal stretch- ing strain in its plane, it stays flat for < 
c , a critical stretching  strain.  Further  stretching  causes  the  sheet  to wrinkle, as shown  in  Fig. 1. This nonintuitive behavior arises because the cla mped boundaries prevent the sheet from  contracting  laterally  in  their  vicinity  setting  up  a local biaxial state of stress; i.e., the sheet is sheared near the boundaries. Because of the symmetry in the problem, an element  of the sheet near  the clamped boundary, but away  from  its  center  line,  will  be  unbalanced  in  the absence  of  a  transverse  stress  because  of  the  biaxial deformation.  This  transverse  stress  is  tensile  near  the clamped  boundary  and  compressive  slightly  away  from it [7,8]. When  
c , the sheet buckles to accom modate the  in-plane  strain   incompatibility  generated  via  the Poisson effect. For  the sheet shown in  Fig. 1, 10 2
.
This is well within the elastic limit, confirming  the ob- servation that thin sheets wrinkle easily in tension and/or shear. However, typically  
c , so that a linear theory is  of  little  use  and  we  must  consider  the  geometrically nonlinear behavior of the wrinkles.
For a sheet so stretched, a periodic texture of parallel wrinkles  decorates  most  of  the  sheet. To  determine  the criterion for the selection of the wavelength and the am- plitude of the wrinkles, we must account for the energetic cost of bending and stretching. Additionally any geomet- ric  constraints  must  be  imposed  using  Lagrange  multi- pliers. We  assume  that  the  out-of-plane  displacement  of the initially flat  sheet  of areaWLisx;y, wherex2 0;Lis the coordinate along the sheet measured from one end  andy20;W;WLis  the  coordinate  perpen- dicular  to  it  measured  from  its  central  axis.  Then  we write the functional to be extremized as U	U B 
U S L:(1) FIG. 1.    Wrinkles   in   a   polyethylene   sheet   of   lengthL 25cm,  widthW10cm,  and  thicknesst0:01cmunder a   uniaxial   tensile   strain 0:10.   (Figure   courtesy   of K. Ravi-Chandar) PHYSICAL   REVIEW   LETTERS week ending 21 FEBRUARY 2003 VOLUME90, NUMBER7 074302-10031-9007=03=90(7)=074302(4)$20.002003  The American Physical Society074302-1 
HereU B 	 1 2 R A B@ 2 y  2 dAis the bending energy due to the deformations which are predominantly in theydirec- tion [9], whereB	Et 3 =121	 2 is the bending stiff- ness andU S 	 1 2 R A Tx@ x  2 dAis the stretching energy [10] in the presence of a tensionTxalong thexdirection [11].  As the sheet  wrinkles in theydirection under  the action of a small compressive stress, it satisfies the con- dition of inextensibility, Z L 0  1 2 @ y  2  	x W  dy	0:(2) This constraint is embodied in the final term in (1),L	 R A bx@ y  2 =2	x=WdA,  wherebx[12]  is  the unknown  Lagrange  multiplier  and	xis  the  imposed compressivetransversedisplacement.TheEuler- Lagrange equation obtained from the condition of a van- ishing first variation of (1),U=	0, yields B@ 4 y Tx@ 2 x  bx@ 2 y 	0:(3) For  the  example  of  the  stretched  sheet,TxEh 	 const,while	x	 W	constfar from the cla mped boundaries,  so  thatbx	const.  Away  from  the  free edges, the wrinkling pattern is periodic so thatx;y	 x;y 2=k n , wherek n 	2n=W,andnis the num- ber   of   wrinkles   [13].   At   the   cla mped   boundaries, 0;y	L;y	0[9]. Substituting a periodic solution of  the  form	 n e ik n y X n xinto  (3)  yields  a  Sturm- Liouville –like problem d 2 X n dx 2 
!
2 n X n 	0;X n 0	X n L	0;(4) where!
2 n 	bk 2 n Bk 4 n =T. Here, the compressive force bxis determined by the nonlinear constraint (2) so that the  effective  potential  associated  with  (4)  isa  priori unknown.  The  solution  to  (4)  whenbconstisX n 	 A n sin!
n x;!
n 	m=L.  Since  the  solution  with  least bending  energy  corresponds  tom	1,  we  have!
n 	 =Lso  thatb n k n 	  2 T L 2 k 2 n 
Bk 2 n and	A n cosk n y 
# n sinx=L.  Plugging  this  into  (2)  yieldsA 2 n k 2 n W=8 	, relating  the wave number and the amplitude, so that finally  we  may  writeU	Bk 2 n 	L  2 T	=k 2 n L.The wavelength	2=kand the amplitudeAare obtained by minimizingUand using (2), 	2   p  B T  1=4 L 1=2 ;A	  2 p   	 W  1=2 :(5) For the stretched sheet, this yields	2Lt 1=2 =31 	 2   1=4 ,A		Lt 1=2 16 =3 2 1	 2  1=4 ,  which  re- sults  have  been  quantitatively  verified  by  experiments [14]. We  observe  that  as	!0,  the  wrinkle  amplitude A!0,  although  the  wavelength   remains  unchanged.
However, this dependence of	xon	is incidental, as any geometric packing constraint suffices to induce wrin- kling. Although the wrinkles are engendered by the weak compressive stresses near  the  cla mped boundaries, they extend  over  the  entire  domain.  To  understand  this,  we consider  the persistence lengthL d of a wrinkle, defined as the distance over which a sheet pinched at one end with an  amplitudeand  width d eventually  flattens  out.
Balancing  the stretching and bending energies over  the area d L d yieldsU B B 2 L d = 3 d U S Eh  2  d =L d so   thatL d  2 d 
 1=2 =t.If d ,L d L;   i.e.,   the wrinkles persist over the entire domain.
We  now  give  a  physical  interpretation  of  the  mecha- nism  for  the  selection  of  the  wrinkle  wavelength.  The form  ofU B in  (1)  makes  it  transparent  that  the  total energy  increases rapidly  for short  wavelengths. The ex- pression for the stretching energyU S  1 2 R A T@ x  2 dAin (1)  is analogous to the form of  the energy  in an elastic foundation  supporting  a  thin  sheet,U F  1 2 R A K 2 dA, whereKis  the  stiffness  of  the  foundation.  Comparing the  two,  we  see  thatKT=L 2 is  the  stiffness  of  the ‘‘effective’’  elastic  foundation  for  the  stretched  sheet.
Then  the  total  energy  also  increases  with  long  wave- lengths due to the increase in the longitudinal stretching strain.  This  effect  arises  directly  from  the  geometrical constraint of inextensibility in the transverse direction: a larger  wavelength  increases  the  amplitude  of  the wrin- kles, so that it  must also be stretched much  more longi- tudinally. A similar effect is seen in a sheet supported on a  real elastic foundation  [1], where a  longitudinal com- pressive stress field combined with the constraint of  lon- gitudinal inextensibility leads to an increase in energy for long wavelengths. In either case, the balance between the foundation and bending energies leads to the selection of wrinkles of an intermediate wavelength, as in (5) which we may rewrite as   B K  1=4 ;A  	 W  1=2 :(6) These  expressions  make  transparent  the  ingredients  for all  wrinkling  phenomena:  a  thin  sheet  with  a  bending stiffnessB, an effective elastic foundation of stiffnessK, and an imposed compressive strain	=W. The geometric packing constraint leads to the formation of wrinkles, the bending  resistance  of  the  sheet  penalizes  short  wave- length  wrinkles,  while  an  effective  elastic  foundation supporting  the  sheet  penalizes  long  wavelengths,  thus leading  to  the  generation  of  new  intermediate  length scales.  Since  the  actual  form  ofK(orT)and	will vary from one problem to another, (6) leads to a variety of different scalings.
The   wrinkling   of   the   skin   of   a   shriveled   apple [Fig. 2(a)] provides a first tractable testbed for our general theory.  Here, the wrinkles arise  due to the  compression induced  by  the  drying  of  the  flesh,  which  is  an  elastic substrate  of  thicknessH s and Young’s modulusE s
.The wavelength  is determined by a competition between the effect  of  the flesh which  resists large wavelength defor- mations,  and  the  bending  stiffness  of  the  skin  which prevents short wavelength deformations. In this situation, the stiffness of the substrateK	E s f=l p =l p , wherel p PHYSICAL   REVIEW   LETTERS week ending 21 FEBRUARY 2003 VOLUME90, NUMBER7 074302-2074302-2 
is a characteristic penetration  length of  the  deformation andf=l p is a dimensionless function that depends on the geometry of  the system.  For an  incompressible sub- strate, the horizontal deformation scales as=l p
. Then the  dominant  shear  strain  scales  as =l 2 p and the elastic  energy  density  (per  unit  area)  of  the  substrate scales   asE s l p 
 2 E s  2 =l 3 p  2
.   Therefore,f=l p   2 =l 2 p ,  so  that  the  effective  stiffness  of  the  substrate  is KE s  2 =l 3 p
.  In  general,  there  are  two  main  types  of wrinkles:  compression  wrinkles  which  arise  in  a  one- dimensional stress field (induced, say, by muscles) when the substrate is relatively stiff, i.e.,KT=L 2 ,andten- sion  wrinkles  which  arise  in  a  truly  two-dimensional stress field in more subtle way (due to pre-stress, geome- try, and muscular action) whenKT=L 2
. However, in both cases, the constraint of inextensibility is crucial in determining the fine structure of the wrinkles (6). For the shrinkage-induced wrinkles in Fig. 2(a), the wavelength tH s ,  and  so  the  wrinkles  on  the  skin  decay exponentially into the bulk. In this deep substrate limit, l p . ThenKE s =, and the wrinkle wavelength B=K 1=4 givingtE=E s  1=3 [15].   For   the   apple [Fig. 2(a)], we estimateE=E s 10[16], which yields 3t.Fort0:5mm,1:5mm,  qualitatively  consis- tent with our observations.
We now turn to the wrinkling of our skin [Fig. 2(b)], where a thin, relatively stiff epidermis is attached to a soft dermis  which  is  typically  10  times  thicker  [17].  The wrinkled appearance of aging skin  is a consequence  of many factors including the degradation of its mechanical properties, the existing  pre-stress, and the action of  the underlying muscles. While much still needs to be done to understand the detailed effects of these determinants on wrinkling, here we sketch a simple geometric picture of the phenomenon. Over much of the body, this composite layer  sits  atop  a  deep  soft  connective  tissue  so  that  the effect  of  wrinkling  is  minimal.  However,  wrinkling  is prominent in regions where (a) there is excess skin and/or (b)  the skin  is close to the bony skeleton and drapes it.
Here,  the  presence  of  a  pre-stress  can  lead  to  tension wrinkles, seen in the elbows and knees, while the action of muscles can lead to compression wrinkles, seen in the furrowing of one’s brow, although the two effects can act in concert as in the crow’s feet patterns radiating from the eye.  In  these  cases,  the  skin  rests  on  a  shallow  elastic substrate,  andH s twhich  gives  the  penetration lengthl p H s ,andKE s  2 =H 3 s
.  The  wrinkle  wave- length in such cases istH s  1=2 E=E s  1=6
. For human skin,E=E s 10 3 andH s =t10so thatH s
. A quick check of this estimate may be performed by pinching the back  of  one’s  hand  to  determine2H s 5mmgiving 2:5mmfor a simple experiment [Fig. 2(b)]. This is in the right range and could provide a quantitative guide to the empirical art of measuring the anisotropy of skin tautness.
Our  results  could  form  the  basis  of  a  quantitative wrinkling  assay  for  the  mechanical  characterization  of thin solid films. The field of wrinkles generated by a cell crawling on a soft substrate [Fig. 3(a)] [18,19] have long been used as a qualitative assay of  the forces generated during  cell  movement. The  scaling  law  (5)  now  makes this  quantitative.  Inverting  (5)  yieldsTBL 2 = 4 and indicates that the wavelength measurements could be an extremely sensitive technique for the characterization of a distributed  force  field.  The  shear-induced  wrinkling  of polymerized  vesicles  [Fig.  3(b)]  used  for  drug  delivery and as artificial red blood cells [20] suggests a different assay;  here  the  wrinkles  may  be  used  to  deduce  the bending stiffness of  the membrane, a critical parameter in  determining  the  robustness  of  these  vesicles  as  they move  through  capillaries.  Indeed,  rewriting  (5)  yields B	T 4 =16 2 L 2
.  Using   the   data  given   in   [21],  we find thatB4:610 17 Nm. With the additional infor- mation  about  the  in-plane  modulus  which  is  easier  to FIG. 2.    Wrinkling of skin. (a) Wrinkles induced in the skin of an apple (5cm) by the shrinking of the flesh. Observe that the   wrinkles   are   orthogonal   to   the   free   boundary   where the  drying  first  starts.  (b)  Compression  wrinkles  induced  on the back of one’s hand by bunching up the skin substrate. The wavelength  in  such  a  situation  is  predicted  to  scale  as  the thickness of the layer, consistent with observations.
PHYSICAL   REVIEW   LETTERS week ending 21 FEBRUARY 2003 VOLUME90, NUMBER7 074302-3074302-3 
measure, it may be possible to monitor the vesicle thick- ness as a  function  of  the polymerization  index.  For ex- ample, using our bending stiffness just calculated and the in-plane modulus in [21] gives the thickness of the vesicle in Fig. 3(b) as 43 nm.
We conclude by pointing out that our analysis may be formalized  by  a  singular  perturbation  analysis  of  the Fo  ̈ ppl–von Karman equations, which lead to (3) naturally [21]. This opens up various generalizations to include the effects of anisotropy (e.g., textiles), non-Hookean mate- rial  behavior  (e.g.,  elastomers  and  viscous  liquids),  etc.
Indeed,   we   can   even   expect   wrinkles   in   a   rapidly stretched  flat  viscous  sheet,  just  as  they  have  been  ob- served in compressed curved ones [22].  But once again, the essence is in the geometry.
E. C. acknowledges the support of Fundacio  ́ n Andes, of Universidad de Santiago DICYT project ‘‘The table cloth problem’’ (1999 – 2001), of Fondecyt 1020359 (2002), and of Fondap 11980002 (2002). L. M. acknowledges the sup- port of ENS-Paris through a Chaire Condorcet (2001), of ESPCI-Paris through a Chaire Paris Sciences (2001) dur- ing  the preliminary  phase of  this work, and of  the U.S.
National  Institutes  of  Health  and  the  Office  of  Naval Research for continuing support.
*Electronic address: l.mahadevan@damtp.cam.ac.uk [1]   L.   Landau   and   E. M.   Lifshitz,Theory   of   Elasticity (Pergamon, New York, 1986), 3rd ed.
[2]   H. Wagner,  Z.  Flugtech.  Motorluftschiffart,20,  Nos. 8– 12 (1929).
[3]   E. H.Mansfield,inProceedingsoftheXIIth International   Congress   on   Theoretical   and   Applied Mechanics(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1968).
[4]   D. J.  Steigmann,   Proc.   R.  Soc.   London   A429,141 (1990).
[5]   A.   Lobkovsky,   S.   Gentges,   H.   Li,   D.   Morse,   and T. Witten, Science270, 1482 (1995).
[6]   E. Cerda, S. Chaieb, F. Melo, and L. Mahadevan, Nature (London)401, 46 (1999).
[7]   J. Benthem, Q. J. Mech. Appl. Math.16, 413 (1963).
[8]   N.   Freidl,   F. G.   Rammerstorfer,   and   F. D.   Fischer, Comput. Struct.,78, 185 (2000).
[9]   AlthoughU B 	 1 2 R B	 2 dA, the dominant term in the energy is 1 2 R B@ 2 y  2 dAbecause of the short wavelength wrinkles  in  theydirection.  Since  the  resulting  Euler- Lagrange  equation  is  then  only  second  order  inx,we cannot  satisfy@ x 	0at  the two  endsx	0;Lin this simplified  theory.  In  fact,  the  boundary  layer  size  is OWL, so that our  theory is valid over most of the sheet,  except  near  the  clamped  boundaries,  as  Fig.  1 shows.
[10]   This contribution  is analogous to the energy stored in a string under  tension when it is plucked.
[11]   Here and elsewhere, we keep terms to orderO 2 .
[12]   The Lagrange multiplierbxphysically denotes a trans- verse force/ length in theydirection. Thenbx>0; i.e., the constraint is imposed by a compressive force/ length.
[13]   The   assumption   of   periodicity   is   exact   if   we  were stretching  a  cylindrical  sheet.  For  a  flat  sheet,  the  as- sumption of periodicity is only approximate, but the edge effects are small and may be safely neglected here.
[14]   E. Cerda,  K.  Ravi-Chandar, and  L.  Mahadevan,  Nature (London)419, 579 (2002).
[15]   N.  Bowden,  S.  Brittain,  A. G.  Evans,  J.W.  Hutchinson, and   G. M.   Whitesides,   Nature   (London),393,146 (1998).
[16]   M.  Grotte,  F.  Duprat,  D.  Loonis,  and  E.  Pietri,  Int.  J.
Food Prop.4, 149 (2001).
[17]   S. Stal and  M. Spira,  inPlastic Surgery,editedbyS.J.
Aston,   R.W.   Beasley,  and  C. H.  Thorne   (Lippincott- Raven  Publications, Philadelphia, 1997) [18]   A. K.  Harris,  P. Wild, and  D. Stopak, Science,208,177 (1980).
[19]   K. Burton, J. H. Park, and D. L. Taylor, Mol. Biol. Cell10, 3745 (1999).
[20]   A. Walter, H. Rehage, and H.  Leonard, Colloids Surf.  A 183 –185, 123 (2001).
[21]   The scaled Fo  ̈ ppl–von Karman equations may be written as, 2 r 4 w	#;w;r 4 #	w;w,   wherew;a	 a ;xx w ;yy 
w ;xx a ;yy 2a ;xy w ;xy ,and,	h=L1.
Using   the  following  scalings:xO1,yO, 1=2 , # ;xx 	TO1,# ;yy 	bO,,wO, 1=2 and ex- panding  the  solution  in  powers  of,,  we  get  (3)  at O,.
[22]   R.  da  Silveira,  S.  Chaieb,  and  L.  Mahadevan,  Science, 287, 1468 (2000).
FIG. 3.    The  basis  for  wrinkling  assays  of  thin  solid  films.
(a) Wrinkles on a thin elastic substrate induced by  the forces exerted by a cell (figure courtesy of K. Burton, reprinted from [19] with permission by the American Society of Cell Biology).
Typical wavelengths are in the range of/m, and lengths are in the range of10/m. (b) Wrinkles on a vesicle (10/mthat is solid in its plane; observe that the wrinkles appear at45  to the   direction  to  flow-induced  shear,   corresponding   to  the direction  of  maximum  compression  (figure  courtesy  of  H.
Rehage,   reprinted   from   [20]   with   permission   of   Elsevier Science).
PHYSICAL   REVIEW   LETTERS week ending 21 FEBRUARY 2003 VOLUME90, NUMBER7 074302-4074302-4 
441 to accurate guidance of retinal photoreceptor axons? One of the major signaling pathways activated  by  InR  involves  the  lipid  kinase phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and the protein kinase Akt/PKB (see the figure). InR signals through this pathway to stimulate pro- tein synthesis and thus cell growth. This path- way  could  be  involved  in  retinal  axon  guid- ance in at least three ways. First, although not required for axon growth, protein synthesis is required  for  guidance  of  cultured  vertebrate retinal axons (5). Second, PI3K plays a criti- cal  part  in  directional  sensing  during  the chemotaxis  of  leukocytes  and  amoebae, where  it  acts  to  amplify  a  shallow  external ligand gradient into a steep internal gradient of  phosphorylated  lipids  (8).  And  third,  this pathway also contributes to axonal responses to  bona  fide  guidance  cues  such  as  netrins (9).  If  any  of  these  processes  also  operates during Drosophilaretinal  axon  guidance, then  misregulation  of  PI3K  activity  might lead  to  pathfinding  errors.  Loss  of  a  major PI3K regulator such as InR could thus result, rather nonspecifically, in guidance errors.
This  view  is  clearly  at  odds  with  the  no- tion of Song et al.that InR’s function in axon guidance  involves  the  Dock-Pak  pathway rather  than  the  PI3K-Akt/PKB  pathway.
Their  conclusion  is,  however,  based  on  two negative observations: Retinal axon guidance is  normal  in  chicomutants;  and  no  dosage- sensitive genetic interactions could be detect- ed between InRand chico, as they could be- tween InRand dock.  Neither  of  these  argu- ments  is  convincing.  InR  can  evidently  still regulate cell growth in the absence of Chico (4),  and  no  dosage-sensitive  genetic  interac- tions have yet been reported between InRand chicoin  any  system,  including  those  where they  do  clearly  act  in  concert.  Evidently, Chico is neither an essential nor a rate-limit- ing  factor  in  signal  transduction  from  InR to PI3K. It thus remains an open question as to  which  pathways  mediate  InR  signaling in retinal axon guidance. Most likely, both the Dock and PI3K pathways are involved.
Precisely  how  InR  contributes  to  retinal axon  guidance  thus  remains  something  of  a mystery. But one thing is clear from this work: InR  signaling  is  essential  for  correct  brain wiring.  This  is  an  important  and  provocative finding, raising the possibility that wiring de- fects may also underlie cognitive impairment in  disorders  of  insulin  signaling  in  humans and  animal  models.  Given  its  many  different functions,  unraveling  insulin’s  role  in  the  de- veloping  brain  will  be  a  challenging  task.  It also promises to be a rewarding one.
References 1.  J. Song et al.,Science300,502 (2003).
2.  P. A. Garrity et al., Cell85,639 (1996).
3.  H. Hing et al.,Cell97,853 (1999).
4.  R. Böhni et al., Cell97,865 (1999).
5.  D. Campbell, C. Holt,Neuron32,1013 (2001).
6.  W. Brogiolo  et al.,Curr. Biol.11,213 (2001).
7.  E. J. Rulifson et al.,Science296,1118 (2002).
8.  C.  Y.  Chung et  al.,Trends  Biochem.  Sci.26,557 (2001).
9.  G. Ming  et al.,Neuron23,139 (1999).
I n 1973, a Ph.D. student at the University of  Paris,  Mireille  Delaye,  was  looking with a laser at the fluctuations in a piece of soap. More precisely, she was studying a “smectic A” liquid crystal—something like a  club  sandwich  of  soft  layers  at  the  mo- lecular scale (see the figure, left panel). By accident,  she  touched  the  sample,  which was  hot,  and  quickly  removed  her  finger.
To her  amazement,  a  set  of  diffraction peaks  appeared  on  the  room’s  ceiling, caused by the reflected laser beam.  What  had  happened  was  soon  explained in Orsay and at Harvard, where the same pat- tern had been seen by Clark and Meyer (1).
Under tension the soft layers wrinkle (see the figure, right panel). The distance λbetween wrinkles  is  a  compromise  between  bending energies and standard deformation energies.
It is given by the square root of a molecular size  (the  ratio  of  two  elastic  moduli)  multi- plied by a sample size (its width). This wrin- kling  has  now  been  cast  in  a  much  broader perspective  by  Cerda  and  Mahadevan  in  a paper in Physical Review Letters(2).
The authors start from a common obser- vation. Take a thin plastic sheet (of the type used for food packaging), cut a ribbon from it, and pull at both ends. A set of wrinkles, parallel  to  the  ribbon,  appears.  The  authors show that again, the wavelength λis propor- tional to the square root of the sample size.  This  looks  at  first  like  no  more  than  an amusing exercise in mechanics. But in fact, it  has  implications  for  many  aspects  of everyday  life.  Cerda  and  Mahadevan  show how an old apple wrinkles, and what length scales are involved. They also discuss human skin, which consists of a relatively stiff epi- dermis  attached  to  a  soft  dermis  that  is  10 times thicker. This composite layer is at rest on  most  of  our  body,  with  two  exceptions.
First, there are regions with excess skin. The authors analyze how, by pinching the back of our own hand, we initiate an instability with a typical wavelength of 2.5 mm. Second, in regions  where  the  skin  is  near  a  bone  and drapes it, a tension can induce wrinkles, just as in the case of the plastic sheet.  These  ideas  are  also  relevant  at  a  much smaller  scale.  When  a  cell  crawls  on  a  soft substrate,  it  generates  wrinkles  in  this  sub- strate.  From  the  analysis  of  Cerda  and Mahadevan, one can in principle deduce the tension  applied  by  the  cell  from  the  inter- wrinkle  distance  λ.  Another  example  is  a “vesicle”—a thin, soft bag formed by closed lipid  bilayers  with  a  thickness  of  ~3  nm.  If the vesicle is put under mild tension (for ex- ample by shear flows), it wrinkles.  Can  we  also  extend  these  considera- tions to the “skin” of solid rock that covers our Earth, a little bit like the skin on a cup of hot milk? Hot milk does show wrinkles.
But at the geophysical level, we may not be able  to  observe  the  Cerda-Mahadevan  in- stability under tension: The solid sheet may break before it wrinkles.  The paper of Cerda and Mahadevan pro- vides a beautiful and simple understanding of  many  natural  phenomena—bridging geometry, mechanics, physics, and even bi- ology.  This  advance  is  comparable  to  that achieved a few years ago on the physics of crumpled  paper  by  Witten  and  co-workers (3). New chapters are required for the clas- sic  book  of  D’Arcy  Wentworth  Thompson On Growth and Form(4).
References 1.  P. G. de Gennes, J. Prost,The Physics of Liquid Crystals (Science Publications, Clarendon, Oxford, ed. 2, 1993), section 7.1.7.
2.  E. Cerda, L. Mahadevan, Phys.  Rev.  Lett.90,074302 (2003).
3.  A. Lobkovsky, S. Gentges, H. Li, T. Witten, Science270, 1482 (1995) .
4.  D.  W.  Thompson ,  On  Growth  and  Form:  A  New Edition (Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  Cambridge,  UK, 1942).
PHYSICS How Soft Skin Wrinkles Françoise Brochard-Wyart and Pierre Gilles de Gennes  T T λ Wrinkling under tension.At the molecular lev- el, a smectic A liquid crystal is a pile of fluid lay- ers  (left). If  we  put  the  pile  under  a  tension   T, the layers wrinkle to fill the added space (right).
The  wavelength  λ of  the  wrinkles  is  a  few  mi- crometers. For a complete discussion see ( 2).
F.Brochard-Wyart  is  in  the  Section  de  Recherche, Institut  Curie,  11  rue  Pierre  et  Marie  Curie,  75231 Paris  Cedex  05,  France.  E-mail:  brochard@curie.fr P.G.de  Gennes  is  at  the  Collège  de  France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. E-mail: pgg@curie.fr PERSPECTIVES www.sciencemag.orgSCIENCEVOL 30018 APRIL 2003