Apple reports fourth quarter results - Apple                   

 

*   [Apple](/)
*   *   [Store](/us/shop/goto/store)
    
    *   [Mac](/mac/)
    
    *   [iPad](/ipad/)
    
    *   [iPhone](/iphone/)
    
    *   [Watch](/watch/)
    
    *   [Vision](/apple-vision-pro/)
    
    *   [AirPods](/airpods/)
    
    *   [TV & Home](/tv-home/)
    
    *   [Entertainment](/entertainment/)
    
    *   [Accessories](/us/shop/goto/buy_accessories)
    
    *   [Support](https://support.apple.com/?cid=gn-ols-home-hp-tab)
    
*   [](/us/search)
    
*   [](/us/shop/goto/bag)0+
    

[Newsroom](/newsroom/)

Open Newsroom navigation Close Newsroom navigation

*   [Apple Services](/newsroom/apple-services/)
*   [Apple Stories](/newsroom/apple-stories/)

Search Newsroom Close

 opens in new window

PRESS RELEASE October 30, 2025

# Apple reports fourth quarter results

September quarter records for total company revenue, iPhone revenue and EPS  
  
Services revenue reaches new all-time high

CUPERTINO, CALIFORNIA Apple today announced financial results for its fiscal 2025 fourth quarter ended September 27, 2025. The Company posted quarterly revenue of $102.5 billion, up 8 percent year over year. Diluted earnings per share was $1.85, up 13 percent year over year on an adjusted basis.1

“Today, Apple is very proud to report a September quarter revenue record of $102.5 billion, including a September quarter revenue record for iPhone and an all-time revenue record for Services,” said Tim Cook, Apple’s CEO. “In September, we were thrilled to launch our best iPhone lineup ever, including iPhone 17, iPhone 17 Pro and Pro Max, and iPhone Air. In addition, we launched the fantastic AirPods Pro 3 and the all-new Apple Watch lineup. When combined with the recently announced MacBook Pro and iPad Pro with the powerhouse M5 chip, we are excited to be sharing our most extraordinary lineup of products as we head into the holiday season.”

“Our September quarter results capped off a record fiscal year, with revenue reaching $416 billion, as well as double-digit EPS growth,” said Kevan Parekh, Apple’s CFO. “And thanks to our very high levels of customer satisfaction and loyalty, our installed base of active devices also reached a new all-time high across all product categories and geographic segments.”

Apple’s board of directors has declared a cash dividend of $0.26 per share of the Company’s common stock. The dividend is payable on November 13, 2025, to shareholders of record as of the close of business on November 10, 2025.

Apple will provide live streaming of its Q4 2025 financial results conference call beginning at 2:00 p.m. PT on October 30, 2025, at [apple.com/investor/earnings-call](https://www.apple.com/investor/earnings-call/). The webcast will be available for replay for approximately two weeks thereafter.

1.  Non-GAAP measure excluding the one-time income tax charge recognized during the fourth quarter of 2024 related to the impact of the reversal of the European General Court’s State Aid decision. See the section titled “Reconciliation of 2024 Non-GAAP to GAAP Results of Operations” at the end of the accompanying financial statements.

## Media

*   Consolidated Financial Statements
    
    [View PDF](/newsroom/pdfs/fy2025-q4/FY25_Q4_Consolidated_Financial_Statements.pdf)
    

Apple periodically provides information for investors on its corporate website, [apple.com](https://www.apple.com/), and its investor relations website, [investor.apple.com](https://investor.apple.com/). This includes press releases and other information about financial performance, reports filed or furnished with the SEC, information on corporate governance, and details related to its annual meeting of shareholders.  
  

This press release contains forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements include without limitation those about payment of the Company’s quarterly dividend and future business plans. These statements involve risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially from any future results expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Risks and uncertainties include without limitation: effects of global and regional economic conditions, including as a result of government policies, trade and other international disputes, geopolitical tensions, conflict, terrorism, natural disasters, and public health issues; risks relating to the design, manufacture, introduction, and transition of products and services in highly competitive and rapidly changing markets, including from reliance on third parties for components, technology, manufacturing, applications, services, support, and content; risks relating to information technology system failures, network disruptions, and failure to protect, loss of, or unauthorized access to, or release of, data; and effects of unfavorable legal proceedings, government investigations, and complex and changing laws and regulations. More information on these risks and other potential factors that could affect the Company’s business, reputation, results of operations, financial condition, and stock price is included in the Company’s filings with the SEC, including in the “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” sections of the Company’s most recently filed periodic reports on Form 10-K and Form 10-Q and subsequent filings. The Company assumes no obligation to update any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date they are made.

### **About Apple**

Apple revolutionized personal technology with the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984. Today, Apple leads the world in innovation with iPhone, iPad, Mac, AirPods, Apple Watch, and Apple Vision Pro. Apple’s six software platforms — iOS, iPadOS, macOS, watchOS, visionOS, and tvOS — provide seamless experiences across all Apple devices and empower people with breakthrough services including the App Store, Apple Music, Apple Pay, iCloud, and Apple TV. Apple’s more than 150,000 employees are dedicated to making the best products on earth and to leaving the world better than we found it.

## Press Contact

Josh Rosenstock

Apple

[jrosenstock@apple.com](mailto:jrosenstock@apple.com%20)

(408) 862-1142

## Investor Relations Contact

Suhasini Chandramouli

Apple

[suhasini@apple.com](mailto:suhasini@apple.com)

(408) 974-3123

© 2025 Apple Inc. All rights reserved. Apple and the Apple logo are trademarks of Apple. Other company and product names may be trademarks of their respective owners.  

[

Apple Newsroom

The latest news and updates,  
direct from Apple.

Read more



](/newsroom/)

Stay up to date with the latest articles from Apple Newsroom.

Dismiss Get Notifications

## Apple Footer

[ Apple](/)

1.  [Newsroom](/newsroom/)
2.  Apple reports fourth quarter results 

### Shop and Learn Shop and Learn

*   [Store](/us/shop/goto/store)
*   [Mac](/mac/)
*   [iPad](/ipad/)
*   [iPhone](/iphone/)
*   [Watch](/watch/)
*   [Vision](/apple-vision-pro/)
*   [AirPods](/airpods/)
*   [TV & Home](/tv-home/)
*   [AirTag](/airtag/)
*   [Accessories](/us/shop/goto/buy_accessories)
*   [Gift Cards](/us/shop/goto/giftcards)

### Apple Wallet Apple Wallet

*   [Wallet](/wallet/)
*   [Apple Card](/apple-card/)
*   [Apple Pay](/apple-pay/)
*   [Apple Cash](/apple-cash/)

### Account Account

*   [Manage Your Apple Account](https://account.apple.com/)
*   [Apple Store Account](/us/shop/goto/account)
*   [iCloud.com](https://www.icloud.com)

### Entertainment Entertainment

*   [Apple One](/apple-one/)
*   [Apple TV+](/apple-tv-plus/)
*   [Apple Music](/apple-music/)
*   [Apple Arcade](/apple-arcade/)
*   [Apple Fitness+](/apple-fitness-plus/)
*   [Apple News+](/apple-news/)
*   [Apple Podcasts](/apple-podcasts/)
*   [Apple Books](/apple-books/)
*   [App Store](/app-store/)

### Apple Store Apple Store

*   [Find a Store](/retail/)
*   [Genius Bar](/retail/geniusbar/)
*   [Today at Apple](/today/)
*   [Group Reservations](/today/groups/)
*   [Apple Camp](/today/camp/)
*   [Apple Store App](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/apple-store/id375380948)
*   [Certified Refurbished](/us/shop/goto/special_deals)
*   [Apple Trade In](/us/shop/goto/trade_in)
*   [Financing](/us/shop/goto/payment_plan)
*   [Carrier Deals at Apple](/us/shop/goto/buy_iphone/carrier_offers)
*   [Order Status](/us/shop/goto/order/list)
*   [Shopping Help](/us/shop/goto/help)

### For Business For Business

*   [Apple and Business](/business/)
*   [Shop for Business](/retail/business/)

### For Education For Education

*   [Apple and Education](/education/)
*   [Shop for K-12](/education/k12/how-to-buy/)
*   [Shop for College](/us/shop/goto/educationrouting)

### For Healthcare For Healthcare

*   [Apple in Healthcare](/healthcare/)
*   [Mac in Healthcare](/healthcare/mac/)
*   [Health on Apple Watch](/healthcare/apple-watch/)
*   [Health Records on iPhone and iPad](/healthcare/health-records/)

### For Government For Government

*   [Shop for Government](/r/store/government/)
*   [Shop for Veterans and Military](/us/shop/goto/eppstore/veteransandmilitary)

### Apple Values Apple Values

*   [Accessibility](/accessibility/)
*   [Education](/education-initiative/)
*   [Environment](/environment/)
*   [Inclusion and Diversity](/diversity/)
*   [Privacy](/privacy/)
*   [Racial Equity and Justice](/racial-equity-justice-initiative/)
*   [Supply Chain](/supply-chain/)

### About Apple About Apple

*   [Newsroom](/newsroom/)
*   [Apple Leadership](/leadership/)
*   [Career Opportunities](/careers/us/)
*   [Investors](https://investor.apple.com/)
*   [Ethics & Compliance](/compliance/)
*   [Events](/apple-events/)
*   [Contact Apple](/contact/)

More ways to shop: [Find an Apple Store](/retail/) or [other retailer](https://locate.apple.com/) near you. Or call 1-800-MY-APPLE.

[United States (English)](/choose-country-region/ "Choose your country or region") [Español](/us-es/ "Esta página está disponible en Español")

Copyright © 2025 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.

*   [Privacy Policy](/legal/privacy/)
*   [Terms of Use](/legal/internet-services/terms/site.html)
*   [Sales and Refunds](/us/shop/goto/help/sales_refunds)
*   [Legal](/legal/)
*   [Site Map](/sitemap/)