I Love My Wife, My Wife Is Dead - Richard Feynman to Arline Feynman — Bingqian Gao                                                 

[

0

](/cart)

[Skip to Content](#page) 

[Bingqian Gao](/)

[Home](/)

[Writing](/mywriting)

[Portfolio](/portfolio)

[Services](/services)

[About](/about)

[Contact](/contact)

Open Menu Close Menu

[Bingqian Gao](/)

[Home](/)

[Writing](/mywriting)

[Portfolio](/portfolio)

[Services](/services)

[About](/about)

[Contact](/contact)

Open Menu Close Menu

[

Home

](/)

[

Writing

](/mywriting)

[

Portfolio

](/portfolio)

[

Services

](/services)

[

About

](/about)

[Contact](/contact)

# I Love My Wife, My Wife Is Dead - Richard Feynman to Arline Feynman

15 Jul

Written By [Bingqian Gao](/poetry?author=6324805b83e63a7c11eef2e8)

_Richard Feynman was one of the best-known and most influential physicists of his generation. In the 1940s, he played a part in the development of the atomic bomb; in 1986, as a key member of the Rogers Commission, he investigated the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster and identified its cause; in 1965, he and two colleagues were awarded the Nobel Prize “for their fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics, with deep-ploughing consequences for the physics of elementary particles.” He was also an incredibly likeable character, and made countless other advances in his field, the complexities of which I will never be able understand. In June of 1945, his wife and high-school sweetheart, Arline, passed away after succumbing to tuberculosis. She was 25-years-old. 16 months later, in October of 1946, Richard wrote his late wife a heartbreaking love letter and sealed it in an envelope. It remained unopened until after his death in 1988._

[Check out my YouTube channel for more poetry reading](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLMSa74IE-qpZHmtxBYfPxiBZMJXPPLROe&si=oA6RU2wlp7zaieD5) 

  

October 17, 1946

  

D’Arline,

  

I adore you, sweetheart.

  

I know how much you like to hear that — but I don’t only write it because you like it — I write it because it makes me warm all over inside to write it to you.

  

It is such a terribly long time since I last wrote to you — almost two years but I know you’ll excuse me because you understand how I am, stubborn and realistic; and I thought there was no sense to writing.

  

But now I know my darling wife that it is right to do what I have delayed in doing, and that I have done so much in the past. I want to tell you I love you. I want to love you. I always will love you.

  

I find it hard to understand in my mind what it means to love you after you are dead — but I still want to comfort and take care of you — and I want you to love me and care for me. I want to have problems to discuss with you — I want to do little projects with you. I never thought until just now that we can do that. What should we do. We started to learn to make clothes together — or learn Chinese — or getting a movie projector. Can’t I do something now? No. I am alone without you and you were the “idea-woman” and general instigator of all our wild adventures.

  

When you were sick you worried because you could not give me something that you wanted to and thought I needed. You needn’t have worried. Just as I told you then there was no real need because I loved you in so many ways so much. And now it is clearly even more true — you can give me nothing now yet I love you so that you stand in my way of loving anyone else — but I want you to stand there. You, dead, are so much better than anyone else alive.

  

I know you will assure me that I am foolish and that you want me to have full happiness and don’t want to be in my way. I’ll bet you are surprised that I don’t even have a girlfriend (except you, sweetheart) after two years. But you can’t help it, darling, nor can I — I don’t understand it, for I have met many girls and very nice ones and I don’t want to remain alone — but in two or three meetings they all seem ashes. You only are left to me. You are real.

  

My darling wife, I do adore you.

  

I love my wife. My wife is dead.

  

Rich.

  

PS Please excuse my not mailing this — but I don’t know your new address.

  

[Richard Feynman](/poetry/tag/Richard+Feynman)[Letter](/poetry/tag/Letter)[Healing](/poetry/tag/Healing)[Love Letter](/poetry/tag/Love+Letter)

 [Bingqian Gao](/poetry?author=6324805b83e63a7c11eef2e8)

[

Previous

Previous

## From One To They - Radha Devaraj

](/poetry/blog-post-title-four-ggzxs)[

Next

Next

## The Invitation - Oriah Mountain Dreamer

](/poetry/the-invitation)

[About](/about) [Contact](/contact)

Made with Love

## Subscribe

Sign up to my newsletters!

First Name 

Last Name 

Email Address 

Sign Up

Thank you!

No Spams.

[

](https://www.instagram.com/notsuperwomansusie/)[

](https://www.youtube.com/@notsuperwomansusie)[

](https://www.linkedin.com/in/bingqiangao/)