..  /  AN ALGEBRAIC LANGUAGE FOR THE  MANIPULATION OF SYMBOLIC EXPRESSIONS  by John McCarthy  Abstract: This memorandl~ is an outline of the  ROLAND SILVER  248 8UCKMINSTER RD.  BROOKLINE 46. MASS.  specification of an incomplete algebraic language  for manipulating symbolic expressioris. The incom- pleteness lies in the fact that while I am confident  that the language so far developed and described here  is adequate and even more convenient than any pre- vious language for describing symbolic manipulations,  certain details of the process have to be explicitly  mentioned in some cases and can be left to the program  in others. This memorandu.m is only an outline and  is sketchy on some important points.  I. Introduction  First \ 'Je shall describe the uses to which the language  can be put and the general features that distinguish it  from other languages used for these purposes.  1.1. Applications of the language  1.1.1. Ttianipulating sentences in fOl"rnal languages  is neceasary for programs that prove theorems and also  for the ad~i£a ta~r projecta  1.1.2. The'formal processes of mathematics such as  algebraic simplification, formal differentiation and  
..  integration, etc. are conveniently programmed in this  language.  101.3. A compiler can be conveniently written in  this language except for input and output section. We  shall illustrate this in discussing the compiler for  this language.  1.1 0 4. Heuristic programs, i.e. pr.ograms involving  tentative procedures are best written in this sort of  language" On e reason is that trees of alternative actions  arc conveniently representedo  10105. In general this language is best suited for  representing expreSSions whose number and length may change  in "lays which it is not convenient for the progrannner to  predict and which have sub-expressions with the same char- acteristicso It is not so convenient for represent1ng  lists of fixed lel1gth where one frequently wants the Eth  element where ~ is computed rather than obtained by adding  1 to n-l ..  1.2~ Features of the language  102.10 Expressions are represented by lists each  element of which occupies a computer wordo Each computer  word of a list in addition to containing a  datum also con- tains the address of the word containing the next element  of the listo 0 for the address of the next element indicates  the last element ... If one element of an expression is a  subexpression th~ word corresponding to this element contains  
--'  the address of the word containing the first element of  the subexpressiono In the IBM 704 or 709 whose 36 bit  word is divided (for the convenient use of certain machine  instructions) into two 15 bit parts (address and decrement)  and two 3 bit parts (prefix and tag) lists are represented  by storing ~n the decrement part of a  word the address (in  our system actually the complement of the address) of the  next l'iord or thelisto The datum is contained mainly in the  address part of the word with the prefix and tag used either  for data or indicators of the kind of list structure o  The use of this kind of computer representation of  list structure was first developed by Newell, Simon and Shaw  for heuristic programming.  1.2.2 0  The convenience of algebraic notation for the  description of procedures derives in large part from the  fact that frequently the output of one procedure serves the  input for another and the funct10nal notation enables us to  avoid giving the intermediate result a name. Also the order  in which a functional formula is written permits us to start  mentally from the desired result and build it up successively  from its component computations.  The other main advantage of the algebraic notation for  list structure processing was first noticed by Gelernter. If  we make routines which form lists functions whose output is  the address of the list formed l  complex structure can be formed  by  single expression compounding hhe list forming functlonso  
Algebraic notation for list processing is not used by  Net'Jell, Simon and Sha~l, pel"haps beaause to do so is most  convenient when a compiler is available, but is used by  Geler-nter in the geometry program. This was accomplished  (on the advice of the present author) by using the Fortran  compiler together with a set of machine language coded  functions for handling the primitive list processeG that  go from one element of a list to the next"  1 .. 203. It is frequently convenient to define certain  processes by recursiono This means that the program defining  a subroutine may use the subroutine itself. This pl"'~sents  the programming d:tfflculty that the intermediate results  forrn2d by a subroutine must be protected from alteration  l'7hen thG routine is used as 0. s ubroutine of itselfo This  is best accomplished by storing t hese results in list  structures. Ne\'lell.,   Simon and Shall1 use this feature exten~  sively and provide lilhat they call push~do"'m lists for saving  intermccUate l"'~sults 0 The geometry progl"am has not used re~  cursive pl"'ograms so i'ar, and the list structure stora.ge of  t0mporary results is difficult in Fortran because of the  comparative inaccessibility of some of these interm8diate  results (ego index reglsters~ the register in which subscripts  are saved, and the temporary storages used 'fJlithin formulas) 0  In the present system the saving of temporary storage  is handled automatica.lly t!fithout spec:!:fic attention by the  pi."'ogrammer wr..en a subroutine is potentially capa.ble of calling  on itself"  
-5=  1,,2oL~o Conditional expl'"'essionso One of the ?rcakest  f0atU.1'CS of present programming languages is in the means  they provide for treating conditionals, that is the cal~  culation of quantities where the operations used depends  on t-;he rCfJult of certain prior tests. The use of proposi- tional qu~ntitles? predicates, and conditional exp~csciono,  essontially solves this problem and eliminates most of the  small scale branching from s ourc·e prog rar:lS. In combina.tion  \·1ith the feature of recul"'r:.live definition it permlts c e r tain  s ubroutir..E;S to be defi ned by single formulas in this la~1guagc  t ho..t ar3 Quite involved pl"ograrns in other languageo  1.2.5. The usc of fU1:lctions and pl"'edicates D.S parameters  of s1..ibl"'outines mal-ces possible some verlY pOiijerful routines for  transforming, and manipulating list structures o  201.. Kinds of quantity  The:~e are several kinds of quantity used in this language.,  The l"2G.de:c lI>lill notice the omission of the list or list struc..,  t Ul'e i tC() 1 t' as a kind of quantity. This is because t'rhilc a  nu:r:tber of :lnteres ting and useful operations on whole lis ts  have been defincd~ most of the calcula.tions we actually pCY'=  f.'o:em cannot as yet be descl."ibed in terms of these ope1."ations 0  It st:i.ll Se2TJS to be necessary to compute with the 8.ddl'esses  of the clements of the lists ..  as i !J.dexes 01" 2.ddresses., In 0. ccrnpiler \'Jrl tten fol" the  
-6~  IBM 10 l 1. or 709 these Nil1 also occupy the decrement parts  of words when referred to by single symbols. We do not  use typographical conventions to distinguish the integers  from other kinds of quantity, but rely on either context  or specific statement. Arithmetic tdth these quantitien  Nill be as in Fortrano  20102. 11Jhole \'Iords o  Whether we will malte the arith~  metic symbols stand for floating point operations is as yet  unsettled ..  2.1.30 Propositional quantities. A propositional quan- tity is represented as a single bit (ioeo 8  has value 0 or l)Q  How these shall be stored is not yet determined.. !n the IBM  709 the SI register might seem to be their natural home.  Propositional expressions are recursively formed by the  Boolean operations" I V. and ~ etc. from propositional quan- tities. They are also formed by predicates (functions taking  values on the set of two elements consisting of 1 for truth  and 0 for falsehood) • . Examples of such pred~cate are (a-b)  and (a < b) l'Ihere a and b range over arithmetic quantitleso  Other predicates may be constructed by the procedures for  defining functions.  Quantities of other ki~ds may be. constructed from proposi· ..  tional quantities by means of conditional eA~ressions. If  P l ,. b .,Pk .are l?I.'<?positi.ona1 expressipns and ° 1 ,  •• 0 :-c k  are  expressions of anyone kind th.en (P1 ~ ° 1 1. •• 0 "~k -) Ok} is  an expression is the. ° cOI'l"esponding to the f .irs t of the p' s  which is true. If. none of the p's .is true the Nhole statement  
involving the conditional expression is not to be executed.  2.1.4. Locational quantities. A point in the program 
.may be la-belled and the ad:dress of such a point {to which  control may be transferred)is called a locational quantity.  The computations with these quantities is limited.  2.1.5. Functional quantities. These will certainly be  allowed as parameters of subroutines, but their full possi ..  bilities might not be explo1ted 1n an early system.  2.2 Kinds of Statement  This list is aga1n incomplete.  2.2.1. The arithmetic (Fortran term) or replacement  statement is the most important kind. It has the form a-b  ll1hel"e a and b have the following forms:  a  has one of the follo1'ling forms:  10 The name of a variable (we shall not go into  the typographical rules for names at this point.)  20 A(i) where a is the name of a variable which  has been designated as subscriptable and i is an integer  expression. (Arrays of more than one dimension may not be  included in the first system.)  3. cwr{i), cpr (1), ctr (1), car (iL csr (1)  cir (1), cbitr (i,n) or csegr (i,n,m)o  In all the above ! represents an integer expression  designating a register in the machine and the expression  represents the contents of a certain part of that register.  ~ For example, statement beginning car (1) -causes a q~ritity  to be computed and stored in the address part of register  leaving the rest of the register unchangedo  
r  -8- The b in a statement a*b is an arbitrary exprGssion  \>Those value is compatible with the space allotted for ito  The recursive rules for the formation of expressions a~e  similar to those of Fortran or the proposed international  algebraic language.  2.202. Control is transferred by the "go" statemento  go(e) causes control to be transferred to the location given  by evaluating the locational expression e, (If e is a  conditional expression then transfer of control will be  conditional)~  2.2.3. The flexibitity of the go statement is increased  by the "set" stat~ment set (Ai ql' ••• ' qm) causes an array  A of size to be established whose contents are the quantities  qlP H, qnD In particular the q's may be locational expres.""  sions and then the expression A(i) where i is an integer  expression denotes the ith of the Ioeational expressions  mentioned.  2.2.4. Subroutines are called to be executed simply  by writing them and their argument as statements. (i.e.,  as in Fortran but loTi thout the word CALL.)  2.2.5. Declarative sentenceso These  have the form  I  declare ( ••• )  where the dots represent a sequence of  assertions of one of the following forms:  1. (aj Pl, ••• ,Pn)  This causes the expressions Pl,ooo,P n  to be  entered in the property list associated with the sym- bol ao Each symbol ~~ the program has such a property  
-9- list which is used and added to by the compiler  and is also made available to the object program.  2 • (a 1  '  • • • lan' P ),  This causes the expression p to be put on the  property list of all the a's.  2.2.6. Compound statements. A sequence of state- ments can be enclosed in Ifpal"entheses Tl  and given a nameC.  The symbols to be used for these Tlvertical parentheses"  are not yet determined.  2.2.7. Iteration statements. The exact forms of  "don (Fortran notation) to be provided are not determined  but they should include the Fortran kind, and a  do over  an explicitly given list or a referred to list structure.  2.2~8. Subroutine definition. This will resemble  the Fortrnn system exc~pt that  1. Parameters can include functions and locat1onal  expressions.  2. Subroutines can either be compiled within a program  or separately.  3. Symbolic reference to variabl~ as well as to other  subroutines will be provided.  2.2.9. Input-output will be handled by subroutines  which can be made quite flexible through the use of property  lists.  
c  -10- 3. Representation of Formal Expressions by Lint Structurey  and the Basic List Structure Operations  3.1. Representation of Expression.  The use of list structures for s"toring data corresponds  to the mathematical system which uses the sequences as the  basic expression. Thus, the sequence (a~ (b,c), (b~ (d,e»),  r) corresponds to the list structure  I 0 I  L. lIT] ->I~ I 01  However, some additional distinctions are required; here  t~,.e follow Gelerntero A word of a list L1 may refer to a list  L2 but we may not wish to regard the list L2 as a part of the  list Ll in the sense that" when the list Ll 1s erased, the list  L2 should also be erased. Also, for certain kinds of data it  is fr0quently convenient to use a whoie word.  Therefore, we shall regard bits 1 and 2 of a word as the  indicator part of the word and adopt the following convention  as to its meaning:  00 the address part of the word is a datum. (It may be  the address of a list~ but if so this new list is not to be  regarded as a sublist of the old one.)  01 the address part of the word refers to a  datum word  which is to be erased when this list 1s erased.  10 the address part of the word refers to a sublist of  
-11- the given list.  The case of a full datum word is only a matter of con- venience to the program, but the distinction between a sub- list of a given list and a refel~nce to another list as an  element of a list is a basic distinction; it 1s the distinc- tion between an element of. a sequence being another sequence  or a name of a sequence.  ~fuile a sequence is the basic object represented by a  list structure certain other expressions are also so repre- sented by considering them as sequences.  F01'" example, a functional expl"essioll f(ell ••• ,a h }  is  represented by the sequence (f,ell ••• ,e h )  and hence  by the  corresponding list structure. Expressions involving oper- ations like + are represented by sequences; namely a+b+c  is represented by the sequence (+,a,b,c). This corresponds  to the flPolish notation" of mathematical logic .. but the  operatIons can have a variable number of arguments since the  end of the sequence of arguments is explicitly displayed.  3.2 The Basic Single Word Functions.  Programs for manipulating l1st structures are described  mainly in terms of replacement statements (i.e., of the form  a=b). The right sides of these statements are compOSitions  of certain "functions". These functiOns, however, are not  all functions in the mathematical sense for two reasons:  1. The value of a nfunction" may depend on the state  of storage of the machine. For example ct~ (n) (£ontents of  c-) the whole of £egister n) is the 36 bit quantity which is stored  in register n.  
-12- 2. The execution of the program corresponding t o  the "function" may change Borne of the arguments and certain  quantities referred to by them.  Before describing these ".functions" we will mention the  free storage listo This is a list of all the registers not  currently in use by the program. A certain fixed register  has the address of the firs t t10rd on the lis t   and each word  on the list has the address of the next word in ita decre- ment part (the rest of' the word being zero). The last word  has zero in its decrement; this being the usual signal for  the end of a 1isto The routines that create lists take  registers from the beginning of the free storage list and  those that erase 1istn put the storage back on the free  storage li:Jt.  The functions for list manipulation are divided into  those conc:)rned t'lith single ''lords or at any rate with a  fixed numb(~r and. those routines dealing with lis ts as a  L1101e.. The latter ot: course are compounded from the former  and naturally l're shall discuss the former first.  The basic functions are divided into a number of classes.  3.2.1. First t41e have those that extract parts of a 704  word and form a word from parts. We shall distinguish the  follol'Jing parts of a  vl0rd and indicate ea.ch of them .by a  characteristic letter.  "ll  the  whole wmtti  p the prefix (bits  s,.  1,  2)  i  the indicator  (bits 1 and 2)  s the sign bit 
..  
()  d  t  -13- the decrement (bits 3-17)  the tag (bits 18-20)  a the address (bits 21-35)  Corresponding to these we have the functions Ere, Xnd,  sgn, dec, tag and add which extract the corresponding parts  ---- of the argument word. The result is regarded as an integer  and hence 1s put in the decrement part of the ~·lOrd.  In uddition to the above we can get the nth bit of a  l"!Crd w with the function bit (w,n) and the segment of' bits  from m to n with the function seg(t'1,m,n). (Needless to say  the others are all special cases of' seg.) For putting a  \'lOrd together out of parts t'le have the fW1ctions  1. comb 4(p; d, t, a) which forms a  word out of the  four parts indicated by the arguments.  2. comb 5(s, i, d, t, a) which forms a word from a  still more detailed prescription).  3. choice (c, a o '   a l ,) This forms a word whose nth  bit is the nth bit of a o  if the nth bit of c is 0 and is  the nth bit of 8 1  if the nth bit of c is 10  3.2.2. Next t'ie have the reference functions which  extract a part of the word in the register whose number 1s  the argument. These functions are cwr, cpr, csr, eir, cdr,  ctr, and car. For example, car (3) is the 15 bit quantity  found in the address part of register 3. In addition we  have cbr (n~m) which extracts the mth bit of' register nand  csgr (n,rnl,m2) which e~ctracts the segment of bits from rnl to  
,  r  -14- m2 of the word in register number n.  Needless to say, these functions are all combinations  of the extraction functions and cwr. For example l  enr (n) ""  add (cw!' (n».  3.2.3. The storage functions. In this system storage  in a register can be accomplished in two ways. The simplest  is by Nriting st-atements c:f one of the forms  CWl"'  (  ) =  cpr (    )  =:  csr  ( )  =  eir  (  )  ;;or  cdr  (  ) ::a  ctr  (  ) ::&  ea.r  (  ) =  cbr ( ,) a  The second is by using one of the functions stwr, stpr,  stsr, stir, stdl" .. sttr, and star. Each of these has tt'10  arg\.unents, the number of the l'egister into which the datum  is to be stored and the datum itself. The rest of the word  referred to is unchanged and the value of the function is the  old contents of the field referred to. It is this facility  for getting the old contents to serve as an argument of a  further process that gives this second method of storage  some advantages. There are two additional storage functions  stbI' and stagr of 3 and 4 argument respectively which store  a single bit and a segment.  
-15- 3.2.4. The construction fW1ctions. These construct  elcIllGnts of list structures by taking '\>lords fl"'om free storage  consw (w) puts the argument ttl into the first word on the  free storage list, shortens the free storage list" and has  a  s vnlue the address of the word into which the datum is  stOl"'edo The other f'unctions in this class are compounds of  this one t:ith construction functions but occur 80 frequently  that they need special names, conael (a,d) puts a in the  address ar.j d in the decrement part of a word from free storage.  consfl {\'l,d) takes ti'/O words from free storage puts w in one  of them, puts the address of that one in the address field  of the other with 1 in the indicator field and d in the decre- ment field. consls (a,d) is like consel (a,d) except that the  indicator field gets a 20  302.5. The erase function erase (3) returns the word  in location J to the free storage list. Its value is the  old contents of this word.  3.206. 'Pointep moving functions. These operations  move a pOinter in a list structure, keeping a list for rever- sion purposes.  Point (J"K) creates a list If( I 0 I and points J at it;  mova, (J) moves the painter in the address direction; movd (J)  moves the pOinter in the decrement direction; movup (J) moves  the pOinter up in the structure 1.e., deletes the first entry  from the 'list belt!lnglng to the structure; kill (J) erases the  // list structure belonging to the pointer.  
-16- 3.3.. Basic operations on l'1hole list structures.  This set, although 1ncomplete, is adequate for the  examples given in the next section.  3.3.1. eralis (J) erases the list structure to which  J points m-;.d returns it to the free storage. It does not  have a value. It can be described in terms of the elemen- tary operations of the previous section by the following  pl .... ogram. However, whether it will pay to use the facilities  of the compiler or to write the routine in machine language  as nn elementary routine will depend on the efficience of the  compilel".  subroutine eralis (J)  / J := 0 ~ return  go (a (cir(J))  £I. (1) jnlc :;: erase (car (J»  a(O) eralis (dec (erase(J»)  return  a(2) eralis (car (J»  '\ go (a(o»  3.3.2. copy (J) This function copies the list structure  to t'-lhich J pOints into free storage •   . Its value is a pOinter  to the CQpied structl~e. A program for it is function copy (J)  /eopy := (J :: 0 -+ 0, cir (J) = 0 ~ consel (car(J) ~ copy (cdr  (J) L cir (J) == 1 ~ consfl (cwl' (car (J» .. copy (cdr (J»)"  eir (J) ; 2 ~ conals (copy (car(J), copy (cdr (J»»  " return  
I  -17- This program ignores tags and signso A version which  does not is  ,  function copy (J)  !copy = . JJ=O-+ 0, 1 ..-+consw (comb ~(cpr (3) t copy  cdr(J) , ctt' (J), (cir·-·(J) 111& 0 ~ cal'" (J), cir(J) = 1  \  ~ consw (em-(car (J»), cir (J) = 2 ~ copy (car m»))  " return  363.31 Search (L,J,Pl,P2,P3,M). The value of search  (L,J,Pl,P2,P3,M) is the address J of the next element of the  list structure L which satisfies the condition Pl. (Pl is  a propositional expression in J  and J is a dummy variable.)  p.l-:--and ~ are expressions in J which define tIe.'list stL'ucture  searched in that P is the condition that the structure con- tinues in the address direction and p~ is the condition that  it continues in the decrement direction.  M is a location in which is stored a strcc turc \llhich  keeps  track of where we. are in the structure co that the  search can be continued (by another statement or a return to  the same one) from where it left off.  It L * 0 or if no element is found the value of search is  0 ...  3.3.4. Maplist (L,J,f(J)}. The value of this function  is the address of' a list formed from the l1st L by mappil'lg  the element J into f(J)o  3.3.5. list (il~ ••• ,in)o The value of list tl, ... i n )  is the address of a . . list whose items are iI' _ •• ,in-Appropriate  
r :  r  f"  l  I  I  -18- indications are included in the words if the items are  full '!'lords or sublists.  The major form of input consists of symbolic expressions  on IBM cards.  Such expressions are translated on input as fOllows:  1. Certain characters on a card are regarded as con- nectives and both serve as punctuation and to denote certain  operations. With the present Fortran characters these include  everything but the digits, the letters and the decimal point  immediately following a digit. These characters or sequences  of them except when in a quoted text separate the text into  pal"ts. Bla111ts are ignored except in column 1 of a card \'lhere  they are regarded as a period and right after a dot where  they indicate that it is to be regarded as a period rather  than as a decimal pOint. A format may also designate certain  coll1.l1'1.n t1 1 unsitions as punctuation symbols.  The pi."imal"'Y way expl"essions are taT.!'itten is as sequences  of the form (el,oo.,e m )  where the a's are expressionso This  is read in as a list~ each e being put in the address part  of a \'rord t'Ji th the decrement containing the address of the  next word on the list. If an e is not a term the corresponding  e;~pression is read in to free storage and the address of the  resulting lint is the datum of the higher listo It the item  is a term it is treated as follows:  1. An integer is converted to binary and stored in the  address part of the word.  
('  -19:-- 2. A symbol ls looked up in the symbol table and its  value stored in the address part.  3. A floating point number is stored in a data word  and  the address ot this word is stored.  4. A text 1s stored character by charaoter in a list  structure.  3.3.6. Read (source~ format, symbol table)~  Read (SoLll:·ce,. format) symbol table) has as its value  the address of the structure into which the data read is  put. The first argL~ent is the source of input data~ the  second is the format in which this data is stored~ and the  third is a symbol table relating literal symbols in. the  ext0rnal medium to the addresses i'lhere the referents of  these s~-mbols are to be stored.  3.3.7. Equal (Ll,L2). This predicate tests the  equality of th~ list structures to which Ll and L2 point.  It is defined by the formulas  '>  3 equal (L l "L2)  =-(L l  -L2~ 1" cir (Ll) ~ cir (L 2 )  -> 0, ci!~ (Ll) :a 0 1\ car· (Ll) f car (L2) ---;;'0,. cir (Ll)  AI 1 A Ci'Ir (car(Ll» f CtrJl" (C2.r(.L2» --;>0 ... careLl) "" 2 1\ ~  equal (car~'Ll) ~ car (L2») -> 0,. l-?> equal (cdt·'Ll)" Cdl" (L2) ) 
..  
"  r  APPENDIX I.  As an example of the use of the language we shall give  a program for analytically differentiating a simple class of  formulas. The formulas in question are in a single variable  x and constants; these are combined by addition and multipli- cation.  A formula is represented by a list structure. A sum 1s  a list whose first tAlord contains a constant representing Uplus"  in its address part and the summands in the address parts of  the successive elements. A product has ntimes" as its first  element followed by the factors. The variable x has "XU in  the address part and a constant has 1 in its tag part and the  datQ~ in the address part.  The function dirf (J) where J points to the structure  representing the £ormula to be differentiated produces a  n8"(:J' formula, the derivative of the old" and its value is a  pointer to this formula. The program 1s:  function d1ft(J) (O"'s~{ (0) 0)  dirf ~ (ctr(J) = 1 ---> 0 1  car(J) =  Goa-.sei Cj )0)  Ox" -> 1, car (el)  = "plus n  -)consel("plus" .. maplist(cdr(J),K,diff(K») .. car  (J) = "times" _)Consel{npl us ", maplist tCdr(J),K, consel  (ntim0s u "  rnaPlist{Cdl"(J)"L 1  ~ = K -> diff(L) .. L =ft K ->  copy (L)]};)))  retUI'n  I .