RICE UNIVERSITY  Spontaneous Emergence of Hierarchy in Biological Systems  by  Jiankui He  A THESIS SUBMITTED  IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE  REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE  DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY  ApPROVED, THESIS COMMITTEE:  Michael W. Deem, Chair  John W. Cox Professor, Department of  Bioengineering  and Department of Physics  and Astronomy  Oleg Igoshin  Assistant Professor, Department of  Bioengineering  J2H7;:</A  Associate Professor, Department of Physics  and Astronomy  and Department of  Chemistry  Houston, Texas  November, 2010  
ABSTRACT  Spontaneous Emergence of Hierarchy in Biological Systems  by  Jiankui He  Hierarchy is widely observed in biological systems. In this thesis, evidence from na- ture is presented to show that protein interactions have became increasingly modular as  evolution  has proceeded over the last four billion years. The evolution of animal body  plan development is considered. Results show the genes that determine the phylum and  superphylum characters evolve slowly, while those genes that determine classes, families,  and speciation evolve more rapidly. This result furnishes support to the hypothesis that  the hierarchical structure of developmental regulatory networks provides an organizing  structure that guides the evolution of aspects of the body plan. Next, the world trade  
network is treated as an evolving system. The theory of modularity predicts that the  trade network is more sensitive to recessionary  shocks and recovers more slowly from  them now than it did 40 years ago, due to structural changes in the world trade network  induced by globalization. Economic  data show that recession-induced change to the world  trade network leads to an increased hierarchical structure of the global trade network for  a  few years after the recession. In the study of influenza virus evolution, an approach for  early detection of new dominant strains is  presented. This method is  shown  to be able to  identify a  cluster around an incipient dominant strain before it becomes dominant. Re- cently,  CRISPR has been suggested to provide adaptive immune response to bacteria. A  population dynamics model is  proposed that explains the biological observation that the  leader-proximal end of CRISPR is  more diversified and the leader-distal end of CRISPR  is less diversifed. Finally, the creation of diversity of antibody repertoire is  investigated.  It is  commonly believed that a heavy chain is generated by randomly combining V, D and  J gene segments. However, using high throughput sequence data in this study, the naive  
iv  VDJ repertoire is shown to be strongly correlated between individuals, which suggest  VDJ recombination involves regulated mechanisms.  
Acknowledgments  First and foremost, I  would like to thank my adviser Dr. Michael W. Deem for his  guidance and support through my years  at Rice. I  am really fortune to have him as my  advisor. I  would also like  to acknowledge the advice and support of Dr. Jun Sun and  Dr. Ramdas Pophale. I am grateful  to Keyao Pan and Dirk Lorenz for many discussions  I  had.  Finally, I  would like  to dedicate this thesis to my fiancee Van Zeng.  
Contents  Abstract ii  Acknowledgments v  List of Figures  xu  List of Tables xxi  1 Introduction 1  1.1 The big pictures. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 1  1.2 Organization of  the thesis ... .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 6  I Hierarchy in evolving systems 12  2 Spontaneous emergence of modularity 13  2.1 Introduction.................................. 13  2.2 A definition of compositional age .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 15  
vii  2.3 Compositional age and evolutionary rate .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 19  2.4 Growth of modularity in the protein-protein interaction network .  .  . .. 19  2.5 Growth of modularity in the domain-domain interaction network. .  . .. 27  2.6  Conclusion................................... 31  3 Hierarchical evolution of animal body plans  33  3.1 Introduction.................................. 33  3.2 Materials and Methods. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 38  3.2.1 Sea urchin gene regulatory network .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 38  3.2.2 Ratio of nonsynonymous substitution to synonymous substitution  of genes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 39  3.3 Results..................................... 42  3.3.1 Evolutionary rate in hierarchy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 42  3.3.2 Generative entrenchment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 45  
viii  3.3.3 Time of appearance of regulatory genes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 48  3.4 Discussion ............................. ··.··· 50  4 Structure and Response in the World Trade Network 54  4.1 Introduction.................................. 54  4.2  Results..................................... 57  4.2.1 Measure of hierarchy by  CCC .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 57  4.2.2 Evolution of  structure in world trade .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 60  4.2.3 Response of world trade to recessions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 66  4.3 Conclusion................................... 71  II Influenza virus evolution  73  5 Prediction of incipient dominant influenza strain by clustering 74  5.1 Introduction.................................. 74  
ix  5.2 Results..................................... 78  5.2.1 Evolutionary path of 2009 A(H1N1) influenza .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 78  5.2.2 Low-dimensional clustering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 81  5.2.3 H3N2 virus evolution for 38 years .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 87  5.2.4 Influenza vaccine strain selection 
.................. 89  5.2.5 Demonstration of low-dimensional sequence clustering method. 95  5.2.6 Prediction for H3N2 influenza in 2009-2010.  98  5.2.7 Comparison with previous results. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 101  5.2.8 Detecting A/Wellington/1/2004 in the 2004 flu season in the South- ern hemisphere .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 
.. 106  5.2.9 Detecting A/California/4/2004 as a  future dominant strain. . .. 108  5.3 Discussion................................... 112  5.4 Materials and Methods .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 114  5.4.1  Data sources. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 114  
x  5.4.2 Geographical spread pattern of 2009 A(H1N1) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 115  5.4.3 Multidimensional scaling .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 116  5.4.4 Biases in the data. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 121  III Bacterial and animal immune systems  122  6 Heterogeneous Diversity of Spacers within CRISPR 123  6.1 Introduction.................................. 123  6.2 Results..................................... 125  6.2.1 Differential equation model ..................... 126  6.2.2 Stochastic simulation model .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 133  6.2.3 Experimental results .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 137  6.3  Conclusion................................... 140  7 Regulated mechanism in antibody VDJ recombination  142  
xi  7.1 Introduction.................................. 142  7.2 Results..................................... 144  7.2.1 Correlation in the naive VDJ repertoire. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 144  7.2.2 Regulated model of  VDJ recombination. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 152  7.3 Conclusion and discussion .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 159  8 Conclusion  161  References  163  
List of Figures  2.1 Distribution of conserved sequences with compositional age to find (a) age  of LUCA,  and (b) divergence time of fungi.  16  2.2 The dN / dB and compositional age of proteins in B. cerevisiae. As mea- sured by  the average dN / dB, newer genes are evolving more rapidly than  older genes. The correlation coefficient is R2 = 0.82 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 20  2.3 The degree distribution of the B. cerevisiae domain-domain interaction  network.  21  
xiii  2.4 The reordered topological overlap matrix of the E. coli protein interaction  network  constructed from proteins whose compositional age are larger than  12.8 (a), 12.6 (b), and 12.2 (c). (d) The linear relationship between com- positional age  and real age. (e) and (f), The banded modularity evolution  of  E. coli and S. cerevisiae, respectively. The lines of different color in (e)  and (f) correspond to different band sizes (W).  23  2.5 Evolution of module modularity of protein interaction network in E. coli  ( a)  and S. cerevisiae (b).  27  2.6 (a) Average  number of proteins in a  module at different compositional  ages, (b) Size of network in different compositional age network.  28  2.7 Evolution of banded modularity of domain-domain interaction network in  E. coli (a) and S. cerevisiae (b). 28  2.8 Domain interaction network modularity evolution in E. coli (a) and S.  cerevisiae (b). Score is the inverse of modularity. 31  
xiv  3.1 The gene regulatory network of sea urchin endomesoderm specification up  to 30 hours. The top five genes form the kernel. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 40  3.2 The hierarchy of the gene regulatory network and functions at different  levels of development of  the body plan. 41  3.3 The ratio of the rate of non-synonymous substitutions to the rate of syn- onymous substitutions for different components of  the gene regulatory net- works  that control the development of animal embryos.  44  3.4 The earliest appearance time of regulatory genes for kernels, plug-ins and  I/Os as experimental data available(Davidson et al., 2002).  47  3.5 The distribution of dN/dS for each hierarchical level. P(dN/dS) is the  probability of a  gene with the dN/dS in specific hierarchical level. .  . .. 48  4.1 Dendrogram representation of trade networks for selected countries at 1969  (top figure) and 2007 (bottom figure).  58  
xv  4.2 The CCC from 1969 to 2007. The upper right insert is the ratio of total  world trade to world GDP. The lower left insert is the total world trade in  units of  US dollar. .............................. 61  4.3 The trade share matrix Sij = M ij / (L:~=1 M im  + L:~=1 M jn ) after hier- archical clustering between countries in 2007.  64  4.4 (a) The ratio of the total world excluding the USA GDP change (per- centage)  to the change of the USA GDP (percentage) in 5  recessions,  F in the y axis. (b) Impulse response analysis of spread of recession.  The world GDP change is plotted as a  function of the CCC. The reduc- tion in the world GDP is greater when the CCC value is  low. Insert  figure:  The GDP recovery from recession can be well fit by the relation  Y(t) f'"J Y(oo) -aexp( -At). Yearly recovery rates, A, are shown versus  the CCC. In accord with theory, the recovery rate is positively correlated  with  the CCC.  68  
xvi  5.1 The evolutionary path of 2009 A(H1N1) influenza.  82  5.2 (a), Kernel density estimation for the protein distance map of 2009 A(H1N1)  influenza as of December 5, 2009. (b), The protein distance map of 2009  A(H1N1)  influenza.  84  5.3  (a) The protein distance map and (b) corresponding Kernel density esti- mation of influenza from 1968 to 2007. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 90  5.4 (a) Kernel density estimation and (c) protein distance map for H3N2  viruses between October 1, 2002 and February 1, 2003. (b) Kernel density  estimation and (d) protein distance map for H3N2 viruses between Oc- tober 1, 2001, and September 9, 2002. A 0.0030 unit of protein distance  equals one  substitution of the HAl protein sequence of H3N2. .  .  .  . .. 99  
xvii  5.5 (a) Kernel density estimation and (c) protein distance map for H3N2  viruses from October 1, 2008, to June 14, 2009. (b) Kernel density es- timation and (d) protein distance map for H3N2 viruses between October  1, 2008, and March 30,2009. A 0.0030 unit of protein distance equals one  substitution of  the HAl protein sequence of H3N2. ............ 102  5.6 (a), Kernel density estimation for the protein distance map for H3N2  viruses between 10/01/2003 and 09/30/2004. (b), Kernel density estima- tion for  the protein distance map for H3N2 viruses between 10/01/2003  and 02/01/2004. (c), Protein distance map for H3N2 viruses between  10/01/2003 and 09/30/2004. We plot a dotted line to separate the two  clusters. (d), Protein distance map for H3N2 viruses between 10/01/2003  and 02/01/2004. The vertical and horizontal axes of all figures represent  protein distance. A  0.0030 unit of protein distance equals one mutation of  the HAl protein sequence of H3N2. .................... 109  
xviii  5.7 Plot of Euclidean distances of proteins as in Fig. 5.4( d) on x-axis and plot  of distance of corresponding proteins in y-axis. Closeness to the diago- nal measures fidelity of  the low dimensional projection. A 0.0030 unit of  protein distance equals one mutation of  the HAl protein sequence of H3N2. 118  6.1 A schematic representation to describe CRISPR-phage dynamics. .... 127  6.2 Diversity of two spacers of  CRISPR with time. .............. 132  6.3 Diversity of spacers at different positions of CRISPR, when the system  reaches steady state. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 
.. 136  6.4 Diversity of spacers of CRISPR loci 1 of S. thermophilus strains[71]. The  positions with a  small number in the x-axis are leader-proximal. .  .  . .. 138  6.5 Diversity of spacers of CRISPR loci of Leptospirillum species. The data  are noisy because the CRISPR loci sequence data of Leptospirillum are  fragmented. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 
.. 139  
xix  7.1 VDJ repertoire correlation analysis for all 14 fish. (a) Correlation of VDJ  repertoire with highly expressed VDJ combinations removed. (b) His- togram of correlation of  VDJ repertoire with the top 2% of most expressed  VDJ combinations removed. In both figures, the simulation is conducted  by randomly swapping  the sequence reads between VDJ combinations. 146  7.2 Naive and activated VDJ repertoire correlation analysis for all 14 fish. . 148  7.3 Correlation  matrix of the activated VDJ repertoire. Only fish 4 and 6, fish  12 and 13 have strong correlations. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 149  7.4 (a) Correlation  Dn between naive VDJ repertoire T[Jk(N) and model esti- mation  P[Jk. (b) Fitting quality as illustrated by fish 5. ......... 154  7.5  ~n(v) as estimated from the model for all 39 V segments in 14 fish. .. 155  7.6 Average Pi(V) over 14 fish. ......................... 156  
xx  7.7 Pr:(J) as estimated from the model for all 5 J segments in 14 fish. Fish  10 and 14 have distinct probability distribution. Recall in Figure 7.4(a)  that the model prediction fits the data of fish 10 and 14 less well than the  other fish. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 
.. 157  7.8 Average Pk(J) over 14 fish. ......................... 158  
List of Tables  3.1 Evotionary rate of regularoty genes III pairs of organisms (Org.1 and  Org. 2). Group 1  are kernels, group 2  are plug-ins, group 3  are  I/O,  group 4  are batteries. STRPU: Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, PATVU:  Patella vulgata, ASTM: Asterina miniata, HEMPU: Hemicentrotus pul- cherrimus, PARLI: Paracentrotus lividus, HELER: Heliocidaris erythro- gramma, HELTB: Heliocidaris tuberculata, LYTVA: Lytechinus variegatus.  52  3.2 P-value of Wilcoxon test for different hierarchical levels. The hypothesis  for the Wilcoxon test is  that two independent samples come from distri- but ions with the same median. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 53  5.1 Summary of results .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 105  5.2 The geographical spread pattern of 2009 A(H1N1). "Others" refers to  other countries except USA and Mexico. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 116  
xxii  5.3 Consensus strain 1 is the calculated from all strains in the cluster on the  right side of Figure 5.5(c). Consensus strain 2 is the calculated from all  strains  in the cluster on the left side of Figure 5.5(c). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .. 119  
Chapter 1  Introduction  The main goal of the research topic in this Doctoral Thesis is the statistical inves- tigation of  the modularity, diversity, and stochasticity in evolving systems. This thesis  contains  three parts covering modularity and hierarchy, influenza virus evolution, and  immune systems [63, 60,  61, 62, 59].  1.1 The big pictures  The main theme of biology in twentieth-century is an attempt to reduce biological  phenomena  to the behavior of molecules [57]. Enormous success has been achieved with  this approach. However, a  discrete biological function  can only rarely be attributed to  an individual molecule. In most cases, biological behavior and functions arises from  the complex interactions of proteins, genes and many other components. For example,  the signal transduction systems involves signal receptors, chemical messagers, molecules  
2  for amplifying signals, proteins related to gene expression and so on. To understand  the organization of complex interaction networks of molecules, we need new concepts to  describe the "design principles" of biological systems, profoundly shaped by evolution.  We argue here that "hierarchy" is a  critical level of biological organization.  Hierarchy  and modularity are prevalent in biology. Generally, a  "module" is a  sub- network  that has more internal edges than external edges, or is  composed of features that  act together in performing some discrete function that is semi-autonomous in relation  to others. For example, some proteins are composed of several domains with indepen- dent function. Each domain in these proteins is a  module.  The gene regulatory network  that control the animal body plan development is also organized into modules. Differ- ent modules controls development of different patterns. Modules are often hierarchically  organized  and hierarchy is a  multi-level organization of modularity. Hierarchy is also  observed in other fields.  In the world trade, economies of individual countries organize  into groups, or modules, that trade more with other countries in the group than with  
3  countries outside the group. For example, the US, Mexico, and Canada trade more with  each other  than with other countries. These trading groups organize into higher-level  groups and so on. In this way the world trade network organizes into a  hierarchical  structure.  Modularity arises in the evolution. Recent studies have proposed the theory of evo- lution of modularity in rugged landscape  [113, 120, 118,  119, 19, 156, 128]. This theory  can be summarized in the formula:  M'  P E =- R  (1.1)  Here, P E  is environmental pressure, R is the resistance to evolving, and M' is the rate  of change of modularity. This theory  state that in the rugged fitness landscape, where  evolution is relatively slow, the rate of change in modularity is proportional  to environ- mental pressure. According  to this theory, the modularity is  inevitable in evolution under  three conditions:  1, the evolution is  in a rugged fitness landscape and therefore relatively  
4  slow; 2, the environment is  changing; and 3, horizontal gene transfer is present. We will  show in  Chapter 2 that the growth of modularity in the evolution of protein interaction  and domain interaction networks.  Hierarchy  can increase the evolvability of biological systems [107, 126, 31, 91]. The  space of all genotype is exponentially large. For example, random searching for fitness  maxima in the landscape seems costly and nearly impossible even on the evolutionary  time scales. For example, a  single nucleotide mutation in the genome rarely increase the  fitness. But a  system that can be decomposed into modules can evolve one module at a  time. Since  the subspace of modules is much smaller than the whole space of all genotype,  it is much easier and faster to find the local fitness maxima in modules. Also, a  modular  structure to the molecules of life allows for biological information to be stored in pieces.  Evolution  can proceed not just by changing one base of the genetic code or movement  of one  atom or amino acid at a  time, but rather by exchange of these functional pieces  among living organisms.  In addition, embedding particular functions in the discrete  
5  modules allows the core function of a  module to be robust to change, and allows for  changing of cell's function  and properties by alerting the connections between modules.  We will show in  Chapter 3 that the evolution of animal body plan occurs in a hierarchical  way, in which  the the core modules are resistant to change and the periphery modules  evolve much faster.  Hierarchy  can increase the robustness of the systems [77]. Robustness enables the  system to main functionalities again external and internal perturbations. Because the  weak interactions between modules can buffer the effect of perturbation, hierarchy retains  the impacts of a perturbation within a single module, while minimizing the effects on the  whole systems. We will show in Chapter 4 that hierarchy in the world trade network can  help countries  to recover more quickly from recessions and to reduce the loss in recessions.  
6  1.2 Organization of the thesis  This thesis is organized into 3  parts. The first part discusses the modularity and  hierarchy in evolving systems.  The second part discusses influenza virus evolution and  influenza vaccine design. The third part discuss the bacterial immune system CRISPR  and VDJ recombination in animal immune systems. This thesis contains 6  different  chapters. Each  chapter documents findings from a  different research projects and is  self-contained.  Chapter 2 documents the spontaneous of modularity in biological systems [63]. Thea- ries of protein  structure postulate a universal, primordial diversity of folds, from which all  proteins are constructed.  It has been further argued that an increasingly diverse array of  selective pressures  upon proteins as evolution has proceeded may have lead to compart- mentalization of protein functions into discrete modules. Scant evidence exists  to date  as to whether modularity has increased or decreased with evolutionary progress. Here  
7  we show that protein interactions became increasingly modular as evolution proceeded  over  the last four billion years. We also introduce a  new method to determine the diver- gence time  of a  protein. We suggest that the modularity of protein interactions arose as  the mechanism by which the increasingly large and complex protein interaction network  maintained the ability to evolve. As evolution proceeded, and the diversity of species  increased  and the environment changed, proteins became more modular and specialized  in their interactions.  Chapter 3 documents the hierarchical evolution of animal body plan development [60].  An open question in animal evolution is why the phylum-and superphylum-Ievel body  plans have changed so little, while the class-and family-level body plans have changed so  greatly since the early Cambrian. Davidson and Erwin [32] proposed that the hierarchical  structure of gene regulatory networks leads to different observed evolutionary rates for  terminal properties of the body plan versus major aspects of body plan morphology.  In this chapter, the speed of evolution of genes in these gene regulatory networks is  
8  calculated. We found that the genes which determine the phylum and superphylum  characters evolve slowly, while those genes which determine  the classes, families, and  speciation evolve more rapidly. This result furnishes  support to the hypothesis that  the hierarchical structure of developmental regulatory networks provides an organizing  structure which guides the evolution of aspects of the body plan.  Chapter 4  documents the structure and response in world trade network [62]. We  examine how the structure of the world trade network has been shaped by globalization  and recessions over the last 40 years. We show that by treating the world trade network  as an evolving system, theory predicts  the trade network is  more sensitive to recessionary  shocks  and recovers more slowly from them now than it did 40 years ago, due to structural  changes in the world trade network induced by globalization. We also show that recession- induced change  to the world trade network leads to an increased hierarchical structure  of  the global trade network for a few years after the recession.  Chapter 5  documents the evolution of influenza viruses [61]. Influenza has been  
9  circulating in the human population and has caused three pandemics in the last century  (1918 H1N1, 1957 H2N2  and 1968 H3N2). The 2009 A(H1N1) was classified by World  Health Organization as the fourth pandemic. Influenza has a  high evolution rate, which  makes vaccine design challenging.  We here consider an approach for early detection of  new dominant strains. By clustering  the 2009 A(H1N1) sequence data, we found two main  clusters. We  then define a  metric to detect the emergence of dominant strains. We show  on historical H3N2  data that this method is able to identify a cluster around an incipient  dominant strain before it becomes dominant. For example, for H3N2 as of 30 March  2009,  the method detects the cluster for the new A/British Columbia/RV1222/2009  strain. This strain detection tool would appear  to be useful for annual influenza vaccine  selection.  Chapter 6  documents the bacterial immune systems [59J. Clustered regularly inter- spaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) in bacterial  and archaeal DNA have recently  been shown  to be a  new type of antiviral immune system in these organisms. We here  
10  study the diversity of spacers in CRISPR under selective pressure. We propose a  popu- lation dynamics model  that explains the biological observation that the leader-proximal  end of  CRISPR is more diversified and the leader-distal end of CRISPR is more con- served. This result is shown  to be in agreement with recent experiments. Our results  show that the CRISPR spacer structure is influenced by and provides a  record of the  viral challenges that bacteria face.  Chapter 7 documents VDJ recombination in animal immune systems. It is  commonly  thought that the VDJ recombination is a  random process and therefore there should  be no correlation in the antibody repertoire. We developed computational methods to  construct the naive antibody repertoire from high throughput zebrafish sequence data.  We found that the naive VDJ repertoire are strongly correlated between individual fish,  which suggest  VDJ recombination involves regulated mechanisms. We further propose a  model  that the frequency of a  particular VDJ combination is  determined by the product  of frequency of its V, D and J gene segments. This model can produce the original data  
11  and it provides insight on how VDJ recombination is regulated. This study allow us to  understand the creation of the diversity of immune response and direct experiments to  uncover the mechanism of VDJ recombination.  
12  Part I  Hierarchy in evolving systems  
Chapter 2  Spontaneous emergence of modularity  2.1 Introduction  Modularity and hierarchy are ubiquitous in biology, compartmentalizing information  of and interactions among genes and proteins  [104, 57, 17,23]. Levels of hierarchy span  atoms, amino acids, secondary structures, proteins, pathways, cells, tissues, organs and  organisms [84, 116, 105]. Physical methods have been used to characterize modularity  in network systems  [81, 115]. For example, selection for stability of function has been  shown  to lead to modular networks [124]. Network motifs have been identified for the  transcriptional regulation network of E. coli [106]. Once modularity has arisen, so that  the environment a species faces is modular, these modularly varying goals were shown to  select for modular structure [76, 9]. A number of other theories have been put forward  that suggest modularity may grow with evolutionary progress [120, 118,  119, 19, 156, 128].  There are suggestions that by being modular, for example, a  system will be more robust  
14  to perturbations and more evolvable [107, 126, 31, 77, 91]. On the other hand, there is  a  selective pressure for evolvability in a population evolving in a changing environment  [38].  It has been hypothesized, therefore, that modularity will arise spontaneously in a popula- tion of individuals evolving in a  changing environment  [34]. Support for this hypothesis  had been elusive [51], until the recent theoretical evidence that environmental change  coupled with horizontal gene transfer inevitably and generically leads  to the evolution of  modular structures  [113]. To date, experimental evidence in support of these theories has  been difficult  to come by, since we can not go back in evolutionary time to observe growth  of modularity. By introducing a  method  to date the divergence time of proteins and a  quantitative definition of modularity,  we here show that modularity in protein-protein  and domain-domain interaction networks has grown as evolution proceeded over  the last  3.5 billion years.  
15  2.2 A definition of compositional age  To study modularity in biology, both a quantitative definition of modularity and a  calibration of evolutionary time for  the biological objects of interest are needed. In this  study,  the compositional age approach is  used to quantify the divergence time of a  protein  [112]. In this method the order of appearance of the amino acids over evolutionary time  is identified.  Proteins that contain a  greater fraction of the oldest amino acids are then  identified as arising earlier than those proteins that contain a greater fraction of the newer  amino acids.  By averaging the compositional age of each of the proteins in a  species,  the average evolutionary time of that species is determined. In this chapter, we make  this  method quantitative, calibrating it upon evolutionary time points over the last 3.5  billion years.  To find  the time of divergence of the earliest proteins, 9  bacteria, 3  archaea, and  4  eukaryotic organisms are selected to find the conserved sequences presumed to have  
16  Compositional Age  Compositional Age  (a)  (b)  Figure 2.1 Distribution of conserved sequences with compositional age to find (a) age of  LUCA,  and (b) divergence time of fungi.  arisen from LUCA (Last Universal Common Ancestor). The bacterial species are A.  aeolicus, T. maritima, D. radiodurans, F. nucleatum, T. pallidum, C. glutamicum, C.  acetobutylicum, S. aureus, and E. coli. The archae a species are A. fulgidus, S. solfatar- icus, and  P. aerophilum. The eukaryote species are C. elegans, S. cerevisiae, S. pombe,  and  D. melanogaster. All the sequence data come from EMBL-EBI. Using the software  CONSER V (http://www.gen-info.osaka-u.ac.jp/ngoto/CONSERV  I), 2163 conserved se- quences are found with greater  than 7 amino acids that appear in all the three kingdoms  
17  and in at least 8  proteins. The compositional age for these sequences is calculated. A  histogram is shown in Fig. 2.1(a).  The distribution of compositional age peaks at 13.32.  There is some debate about the age of LUCA, with estimates ranging from 3.5 to 4.0  billion years ago  [65]. In this study, we set LUCA at 3.8 billion years ago. Therefore a  compositional age of 13.32 corresponds  to a  real age of 3.8 billion years.  To find  the divergence times of fungal proteins, 10 species of fungi are investigated. In  the group Dikarya/ Ascomycota/Saccharomycotina, we choose S. cerevisiae, C. glabrata,  K. lactis, Y. lipolytica, and P. stipitis. In the group Dikarya/ Ascomycota/Pezizomycotina,  we choose N. crass a, M. grisea, and A. fumigatus. 8535 sequences are found with greater  than 15 amino acids that appear in both branches and in at least 4  proteins. The his- togram of compositional age of these sequences is  shown in Fig. 2.1(b). The compositional  age peaks  at 12.1. 1.1 billion years ago is therefore chosen as the real age of divergence  time of these two branches of fungi [65]. So, the compositional age of 12.1 corresponds  to an evolutionary age of 1.1 billion years.  
18  To find the compositional age of recent proteins, we search for the youngest proteins in  E. coli. Only proteins in the COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins) database  are considered,  to exclude those protein fragment without function in the FASTA file.  We compare the proteins in two strains of E. coli: K12 and 0157 :H7 EDL 933. The  0157 strain of  E. coli diverged from K12 strain about 4  million years ago [97J. We take  the strains of E. coli from the COG database that exclude the orthologous proteins that  are shared by K12 and 0157, which should be quite young, probably less than 4 million  years.  The youngest new protein of 0157 has compositional age 9.607. The youngest  new protein of K12 has compositional age 9.652.  We, therefore, set the compositional  age of  the present as 9.6.  
19  2.3 Compositional age and evolutionary rate  To test the definition of composition age, the relationship between the compositional  age of proteins  and the evolutionary rate of the corresponding genes is determined. As the  measure of evolutionary rate, we use the commonly accepted ratio of nonsynonymous to  synonymous substitutions per site (dN / dB). Hirsh et al. provided dN / dB for 3392 genes  from orthologous  open reading frames (ORFs) in four species of yeast [68]. We bin the  proteins by compositional age and calculate the average dN / dB. Results are shown in  Fig. 2.2. Newer genes are evolving more rapidly  than older genes.  2.4 Growth of modularity in the protein-protein interaction  network  We now turn to modularity. Modularity of both protein domain structure and of  the protein-protein interaction network are quantified [12, 88, 87]. The protein-protein  interaction network  data come from DIP. 1846 proteins are obtained with 6971 inter- action edges in E. coli  and 3211 proteins with 17535 interaction edges in S. cerevisiae.  
0.20  en  ~ 0.18  'C  CD  f! 0.16  ~ 0.14  --Linear Fit  0.12 +----.--..----.--r--~___,--.--____i  12.4 12.0 11.6  11.2 10.8  Compositional Age  20  Figure 2.2 The dNjdB and compositional age of proteins in S. cerevisiae. As measured by  the average dN j dB, newer genes are evolving more rapidly than older genes. The correlation  coefficient  is R2 = 0.82  
21  100  •  •  - 10  •  ~  -a..  1  ••  1  K  10  Figure 2.3 The degree distribution of the S. cerevisiae domain-domain interaction network.  The domain-domain interaction data come from InterDom. We only consider domain  interactions  based on the DIP database and take only these domain interactions with a  score  in the top 75%, to eliminate the noisy data. 276 proteins are obtained in E. coli  and 427 proteins in S. cerevisiae, from which we extract the protein domains for study.  Interestingly,  the domain-domain interaction network is scale free with, = 2.4, see Fig.  2.3.  To quantify modularity in the interaction networks, we construct the topological over- 
22  lap matrix [96] from the interaction network, reorder it with the average linkage clustering  method [39], and normalize the number of interactions within modules according to net- work size.  The topological overlap matrix element, Tij, is the ratio of common nearest  neighbors of  the interacting proteins i and j to their respective degrees. The topological  overlap  matrix reflects the topological overlap of the nearest neighbors of two nodes. For  any two nodes i and j, the topological overlap is defined as [96]: Tij  2::11. aiuauj+aij  min(k i ,k j )+l-aij·  Here aij is the elements of the interaction network matrix with value 0  (not interacting)  or 1  (interacting).  The average-linkage hierarchical clustering algorithm is then used [96]  to reorder the topological overlap matrix so that the more tightly linked and clustered  nodes are moved close  to each other. In this way, the modules and hierarchical structure  of the network are identified.  The reordered topological overlap matrix of E. coli at different times is shown in  Fig. 2.4.  The color reflects the strength of the topological overlap of two nodes (from  0.0  to 1.0), as shown in the color bar in Fig. 2.4(a). The protein-protein interaction  
2     4     6     8 10 12  (a)  I:  -
.§  ~2  CD  ~3  WCA  J41-~~~_...----'  14 13 12 11 10  ComposItional AlJG  (d)  10  20  30  (b)  12==;--~~~-,  ~ 10 -:-=.  ~ a~=! ~  -& -==-:: ..  ::! 8 --- 14 ~Emli  i 2 .  m  12.5 12.0 11.5 11.0  Compositional Age  (c)  100 200 JOO  (c)  30 -......  ~25 ~:=~;! - ~ -.. ,. ..  j: ~r--"~--.  1 10  ~ S . cerevisiae  i 5  m O-l-----~~_~~-l  12.4 12.0 11.8 11.2 10.8  Compositional Age  (f)  23  Figure 2.4  The reordered topological overlap matrix of the E. coli protein interaction  network constructed from proteins whose compositional age are larger than 12.8 (a), 12.6 (b),  and 12.2 (c). (d) The linear relationship between compositional age and real age. (e) and (f),  The banded modularity evolution of E. coli and S. cerevisiae, respectively. The lines of different  color in (e)  and (f) correspond to different band sizes (W).  
24  network evolves from an almost saturated, unstructured network III Fig. 2.4(a) to a  mildly  modular network with four modules in Fig. 2.4(b) and then to a  highly modular  network  in Fig. 2.4(c). To compare the modularity quantitatively, we define banded  modularity as the ratio of interaction within a  diagonal band to the total interactions,  normalized by  the ratio of the area of the band to the area of the matrix: Mbanded =  matrix and Tij is the element of reordered topological overlap matrix. Since the network  size grows in time, modularity of network of different sizes is compared.  The factor  Modularity grows  with evolutionary time. In Fig. 2.4(e), the banded modularity grows  with compositional age in E. coli. The similar result is observed in S. cerevisiae in Fig.  2.4(f).  Banded modularity of a saturated matrix, i.e., a matrix with all elements being  1 except  the diagonal ones being 0, is shown in Fig. 2.4 (e) and (f) for comparison. The  banded modularity of a saturated network is 1. This result holds true for different band  
25  widths and different organisms; this phenomenon is robustly observed. In a  modular  structure, there are more interactions within a  module  than between modules. Banded  modularity is a  concise definition of modularity,  but may also be interpreted as simply  locality, in which  true modules may not be identifiable.  To measure modularity in a  more detailed  way, we search along the diagonal of the  reordered topological overlap matrix to find the explicit modules, and the ratio of inter- actions in  the modules to the total interactions is calculate, normalized by the ratio of  the area of modules to the area of the whole matrix. These modules are defined quanti- tatively. First,  we suppose the protein i and i + 1 form a  module, and we ask whether  another another protein  i + 2, should be added to the module. The protein is added if  the average interaction between i + 2  and the existing module is larger than a  cutoff,  which is  set as 0.2 in this study. This procedure continues. When it comes  to a  protein  with average interaction less  than the cutoff, this protein forms the first member of a  new module, and  we begin the search to add further proteins to this new module. The  
26  modules so identified depend on the cutoff. In this study, the E. coli and S. cerevisiae  networks are highly modular. We tried several cutoff and found the results are quite  stable,  with results in accord with visual observation of the clustered matrix. The result  'D E'D  is defined as as module modularity: Mmodule = Efjkij=l Tjk * ( j,ki~=ll)_l, where in the  Ej,kij=l Tjk D(D 1)  upper sum with the prime, k is over those proteins in the same module as j, D is the  dimension of the matrix.  This definition is applied to the reordered topological overlap matrix to obtain the  result for E. coli and S. cerevisiae in Fig. 2.5. The growth of module modularity in  both organisms is  observed. There is  a  positive correlation between banded and modular  modularity.  The growth of modularity is robust to the precise definition of modularity.  The average size of module at different compositional age network is stable, see Fig.  2.6(a).  The relationship between the size of the network and compositional age is show  in Fig. 2.6(b).  The average module size does not change much in evolution, and the  number of proteins in each module in of S. cerevisiae is fewer than that in E. coli,  
27  10  E. coli  35  S. cerevisiae  ~  ~8  ~30  CO  CO  'S  'S  '0 6  '8 25  0  :::E  :::E  ~ 4  ~ 20  0  0  0  0  ffi 2  ffi 15  12.8  12.4  12.0  11.6 11.2  10.8  12.0  11.6  11.2  10.8  Compositional Age  Compositional Age  (a)  (b)  Figure 2.5 Evolution of module modularity of protein interaction network in E. coli (a)  and  S. cerevisiae (b).  perhaps reflecting that S. cerevisiae is more modular.  2.5 Growth of modularity in the domain-domain interaction  network  We observed modularity not only in the protein-protein interaction network, but also  in the domain-domain interaction network. The result of the banded modularity of the  domain-domain interaction network of E. coli and S. cerevisiae is  shown in Fig. 2.7. The  growth of banded modularity is pronounced in both cases.  
28  10  (I) 3200 
.II!  9  1 ... a· S.oereYIIl8e 1 
.~ 2800  I- a-E.ooIl 1  -  . -E.ooIl  • 5.oereYIIlIIe  ~  8  E 2400  ,.  CD  7  Q. 2000  :;  '0 1600  ~  6  ~  5  ~ 1200  8,  a·  a.  a . a 
.  E 800  4  l'!!  :::l  400  ~  3  Z  0  <  2  12.8 12.4  12.0  11.6 11.2 10.8  12.8  12.4 12.0  11.6  112 10.8  Compositional Age  Compositional Age  (a) (b)  Figure 2.6 (a) Average number of proteins  in a module at different compositional  ages, (b)  Size  of network in different compositional age network.  18  20  ~ 16  - . -w-e  S. cerevlslae  18  -  - -  W= I  E. coli  • _10  ~  • We 10 
.. _12  " -  W=12  ·c  16 
.£: 14  -..-_14  //-  -.  (0  14  m  -+ _111  :;  :;  12  _4- _111  "8  12  "'0  10  ~~~ ._ ..  10  0  :::E  8  ~  8  "'0  6  "'0  ~::---- CD  CD  6  "'0  4  -g  ~/  c  4  to  2  m  m  0  m  2  12.612.412.212.011.8 11.6  11.4  12.2 12.0  11.8 11.6 11.4 11.2  11.0  Compositional Age Compositional Age  (a)  (b)  Figure 2.7 Evolut ion of banded modularity of domain-domain interaction net work in E.  coli (a) and S .  cerevisiae (b).  
29  Our definitions of modularity allows the comparison of modularity of matrices of  different sizes.  The saturated interaction matrix does not have any modular structure,  regardless of  the band size, as shown in Fig. 2.4(e),(f). A network generated by randomly  selected proteins in  E. coli is of constant low modularity, independent of the number of  proteins used.  The network constructed based on its compositional age, however, shows a  clear growth of its modularity. This result shows  that the validity of organizing proteins  by their compositional age.  Modularity of  the unweighted domain-domain interaction network is also measured  directly, without construction of topological overlap matrix.  We determine the fraction of  a  protein  to which other proteins interact. To the extent that interactions become more  localized within proteins,  the protein is defined to be more modular. If protein B interacts  with protein A, and the interaction is with only a few of the domains of protein A, then  this interaction is more modular than if protein B interacts with a  greater number of the  domains of protein A. Averaging this measurement over all proteins B, this procedure  
30  gives a  measure of the modularity of protein A. So, we calculate the ratio of interacting  domains  to the number of domains in a  protein, which gives the inverse of modularity.  we define a  Score, which is the inverse of modularity, as: 2~ ~~1 ( :~2/3 + :,B 2 / 3 ). Here  D, LB D, LA  l represents a  protein-protein interaction or a  link. To distinguish the two proteins in  a  link, one  protein is marked as A, the other one as B. The number of links is N. The  term LA (L B )  is the number of amino acids of protein A  (B). The number of interacting  domains is  lA, and the number of total domains is DA in protein A. The ratio of b:  is normalized by the surface area of the target protein L;r, and so the Score should  measure only  the modularity and normalize out the size effect of target proteins.  In Fig. 2.8,  we compare the Scores of different domain-domain interaction network  at different compositional age. The inverse of the Score increases monotonically with  evolutionary progress. Because  the inverse of the Score is modularity, we again observe  that modularity has increased through evolutionary time. This observation is robust  under different definitions of the Score.  
31  0.020  0.020 
....  0.022 
......  0.022 
. . . .  0.024 
....  0.024  0.026  e O
.
026  Q) 0.028 
. 
.  8 0
.
028  E. coli  5 0
.
030 
. 
.  S. cerevisiae  (/)0.030  ~0.032  0.034  0.032  0.Q36  0.038  0.034  12.8     12.4  12.0 11.6 11.2  10.8  12.8     12.4 12.0     11.6  11.2  Compositional Age  Compositional Age  (a)  (b)  Figure 2.8 Domain interaction network modularity evolution in E. coli (a) and S. cerevisiae  (b). Score is the inverse of modularity.  2.6 Conclusion  We have introduced several quantitative definitions of modularity for interacting net- works. We use  them to measure the modularity of the protein-protein interaction network  and domain-domain interaction network in S. cerevisiae and E. coli. We have also intro- duced a  method to quantify the evolutionary divergence time of proteins. We consistently  find  that modularity, by all definitions and in both organisms, has grown through evo- lutionary time. This observation is in agreement with the theory that environmental  
32  change coupled with horizontal gene transfer naturally and inevitably leads to evolution  of increased modularity  [113]. In this sense, early life was a generalist, being less modular.  As evolution proceeded,  and diversity of species increased and the environment changed,  proteins became more modular  and specialized in their interactions.  
Chapter 3  Hierarchical evolution of animal body plans  3.1 Introduction  The Cambrian explosion has been an extensively debated topic in animal evolution for  more  than one century [127, 154]. Biological organisms were composed of individual cells,  occasionally organized  into colonies, before the Cambrian explosion [154, 64]. Subsequent  to the Cambrian explosion, evolution greatly speed up, and the major phyla appeared.  For example,  the bilateral, anterior-posterior organization of body plan appears in fossil  records from the early Cambrian [25]. These results are the basis for the open question  in animal evolution of why  the phylum-and superphylum-Ievel body plans have changed  so little  and no more new phylum-and superphylum-body plans appeared, while the  class-and family-level body plans have changed so greatly with so many class, family,  and species appearing since the early Cambrian [123]. Since the development of the  animal body plan is precisely controlled by gene regulatory networks, the mechanism to  
34  explain the different rates of change of the phylum-and superphylum-Ievel body plans  versus  the class-and family-level body plans may lie in the structure and evolution of  gene regulatory networks.  If the gene regulatory network were an unstructured or nearly random network, any  change  to the network such as deleting one gene would result in drastic difference in  the body plan, because each gene may regulate or be regulated by several other genes,  and the effects of deletion will spread out to the whole network quickly[15]. To resolve  this problem, Davidson and Erwin [32, 42] proposed that the classic evolution theory  based  on selection of changes upon an unstructured genetic framework does not provide  a  satisfactory answer for  the mechanism. Instead, they constructed the gene regulatory  networks  that control the early development of animal embryos (see Fig. 3.1) [80] and  proposed a  hierarchical modular structure of the gene regulatory network. The gene  regulatory network of sea urchin endomesoderm specification  up to 30 hours is composed  of  about sixty genes. This network is relatively modular. For example, as measured by  
35  the commonly used Newman modularity measure [86], defined as the fraction of edges  that lie within modules rather than between modules relative to that expected by chance,  the modularity of this gene regulatory network is 0.49. This modularity value greater  than zero indicates that this network is quite modular.  Davidson  and Erwin found that the gene regulatory network can be described by a  hierarchy  with four types of modules. The first type is named "kernel." For example,  the endoderm specification kernel is composed of five genes in sea urchins, see Fig. 3.1.  The heart-field specification kernel [103, 30] is used in both Drosophila and vertebrate  development.  The other three types are named as "plug-ins," "I/O switches," and "bat- teries."  Each type of module functions differently in the development of embryo. The  kernels might relate to the phylum-and superphylum-level characteristics; the plug-ins  and I/Os might relate to the class, order, and family characteristics; and the batteries  might relate  to the speciation characteristics (see Fig. 3.2). This proposal stimulated  debate [29, 32]. For example, the diverse kinds of changes in the hierarchy of gene regula- 
36  tory networks and their evolutionary consequences are thought to be imperfect, and yet  all essential  major phylum-level body plans appeared at the early Cambrian. Davidson  and Erwin stated that "Critically, these kernels would have formed through the same  processes of evolution as affect  the other components, but once formed and operating to  specify particular body parts, they would have become refractory to subsequent change."  If this theory is correct, we would expect the evolution of the gene regulatory net- work  to be heterogeneous. The "kernels" module should evolve more slowly than other  parts of the gene regulatory network, since the phylum-and superphylum-Ievel body  plan characteristics have not changed substantially since the early Cambrian. The gene  regulatory networks are primarily composed of two elements:  transcription factors and  cis-regulatory modules. Transcription factors are proteins that can either activate or  repress  transcription by binding to cis-regulatory elements. Transcription factor binding  sites are often organized into clusters named cis-regulatory modules, which typically  span  a few hundred nucleotides and can contain dozens of binding sites for several transcription  
37  factors [26]. A full understanding of the evolution of the gene regulatory network would  consider  both transcription factors and cis-regulatory modules. Cis-regulatory modules  are poorly conserved during evolution, and even in closely related species may differ dras- tically  [26, 153]. Because experimental identification of cis-regulatory elements is still not  well developed,  and because computational prediction of cis-regulatory elements is still  difficult  [41], we will here consider only evolution of the transcription factors. Transcrip- tion factors are more conserved  and evolve more slowly than cis-regulatory elements. On  the timescale of hundreds of millions of years that we consider here, it is important to  consider the evolution of transcription factor networks. For example, acquisition of an  extra repressive regulatory domain in the insect protein Ubx results in the prevention of  the development of abdominal legs [99]. Although transcription factors change slowly,  their effect on  the development body plan is of equal importance to that of cis-regulatory  elements, since  the variation of transcription factors directly changes the topology of the  gene regulatory network. To test the theory of Davidson and Erwin, we calculated the  
38  speed of evolution of regulatory genes. We found that those genes which determine the  phylum and superphylum characters evolve slowly, while those genes which determine the  classes, families,  and speciation evolve more rapidly. These observations provide support  for Davidson  and Erwin's theory.  3.2 Materials and Methods  3.2.1 Sea urchin gene regulatory network  The sea urchin is a  traditional model organism in developmental biology. The sea  urchin  (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) and sea star (Asterina miniata ) are in the same  phylum Echinodermata.  The sea urchin is  in the class Echinoidea, and the sea star is in  the class Asteroidea. The last common ancestor of echinoid and asteroid existed about 0.5  billion years ago in  the late Cambrian [109, 21, 125]. Other sea urchins used in this study  are  Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus, Paracentrotus lividus, Heliocidaris erythrogramma, He- liocidaris tuberculata, Lytechinus variegatus. They are in the same superorder Echinacea  with  Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. The genome of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus  
39  purpuratus was sequenced in 2006. The gene sequences used in this paper were all down- loaded from  the EMBL-EBI database in July 2008. The experimentally determined sea  urchin gene regulatory network was downloaded from  http://sugp.caltech.edu/endomes/.  3.2.2 Ratio of nonsynonymous substitution to synonymous substitution of  genes  We used the widely-accepted ratio of the rate of non-synonymous substitutions to  the rate of synonymous substitutions (dN / dS) as a  measure of the rate of evolution.  Generally,  dS is a  measure of evolutionary divergence between two genes due to neutral  substitution, and the dN / dS is the departure from the neutral substitution caused by  functional constraints  and selection. The larger the dN / dS value, the faster the is gene  evolving  due to selection. We used a standard method to calculate dN / dS [69]. First,  we obtain the genes in the gene regulatory networks of sea urchin endomesoderm, see  Fig. 3.1. We applied Wu-BLAST2  to search the orthologous genes in the 7  genomes  mentioned above from EMBL-EBI. All  the protein pairs are required to be reciprocal  
40  Figure 3.1 The gene regulatory network of sea urchin endomesoderm specification up to  30 hours. The top five genes form the kernel.  
Hierarchical  modular structure  Function in the  development  of embryo  Phylum and superphylum  body plan characters  Class, order and family  body plan characters  Speciation body plan  characters  Body plan character  examples  Eye-field and neural crest  specification, gut and  hindbrain regionalization,  immune systems.  Signal transduction systems,  ~. -wing pattern.  Skeletal biominerals, skin,  muscle cells, synaptic  transmission system.  41  Figure 3.2  The hierarchy of the gene regulatory network and functions at different levels  of development of the body plan.  
42  best hits. Since these organisms are closely related, all orthologous protein have the  same name and likely perform similar functions. Then, the orthologous protein pairs  are aligned  in ClustalW [117] and calculated the dN/dS in PAL2NAL [114]. For each  gene,  the dN / dS of all the protein pairs of that gene are averaged. Take gene Bra as an  example, Bra genes are found in sea urchins Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus, Paracentrotus  lividus, Lytechinus variegatus  and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. Bra should also appear  in other sea urchins not yet sequenced. The Bra protein sequences are aligned in each  two sea urchins, 6  pairs in total. For each pair, use PAL2N AL  to calculate dN / dS, see  Table 3.1.  3.3 Results  3.3.1 Evolutionary rate in hierarchy  The dN / dS for genes in gene regulatory networks are listed in Table 3.1. The gene  regulatory network is  composed of transcription factor  (TF) and non-TF proteins. Most  TF genes are utilized for diverse interactions, and the DNA binding domains of all of  
43  them are highly conserved across Bilateria. We average the dN / dB of all proteins in each  hierarchical level,  and the result is shown in Fig. 3.3. The value of dN / dB of kernels is  significantly lower  than plug-ins, I/Os and batteries, see Table 3.2 for P-value. Also, the  regulatory gene group of kernels and plug-ins has a  lower dN / dB value than group of  I/Os and batteries (relative difference = -0.055, P-value = 0.0157 for Wilcoxon test).  From  the probability distribution of dN/dS in Figure 3.5, the distribution of kernels is  narrow width, and the peak probability appears at a  low dN/dS.  If only TF genes are considered, kernels (dN/dB = 0.045) still evolve more slowly  than other components. Slight increase of dN/dB from plug-ins to I/Os and to batteries  is also observed.  (dN/dB = 0.138). Interestingly, the number of organisms for which  an ortholog was detected varies from genes to genes. For example, A. miniata is the  least close organism to S. purpumtus compared to other sea urchins, S. purpumtus and  Asterina miniata are in the same phylum but different orders. Four orthologous genes  between  A. miniata and S. purpumtus. Three of them are kernel genes. The orthologs  
44  0.22  0.20  0.18  0.16  0.14  en  0.12  "'C  - 0.10  Z  "'C  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02  0.00  Kernels  Plug-ins  1/0  Batteries  Figure 3.3 The ratio of the rate of non-synonymous substitutions to the rate of synony- mous substitutions for different components of  the gene regulatory networks that control the  development of animal embryos.  
45  of kernel genes are more likely detected than other genes in far related organism, which  is a  support of slower evolution of kernels.  The results show that if two organisms are in the same phylum, their kernel modules  which determine  the phylum level body plan are conserved. If two organisms are in the  same class or order, their plug-ins and I/O modules are conserved since they determine  the class and order level body plan.  3.3.2 Generative entrenchment  Another supporting evidence comes from the "generative entrenchment" theory by  William  Wimsatt [131, 132]. In the this model, the phenotype is considered as a  gen- erative  structure. The generative structure of the system has a  characteristic set of  causal  interactions which  can be represented by the directed graph, see Fig. 3.1. In  this model, nodes with more downstream connections should have slower evolution rates,  since changes  to them affect many epistatic interactions that must be accommodated  
46  during the evolution. Quantitatively, we account the downstream connections for each  gene in gene regulatory networks. For example, if gene A regulates  the expression of  gene B,  we say gene A has a  downstream connection. We observe that "kernels"  genes  in Fig. 3.1 have an average of 5.4 downstream connections, while the other regulatory  genes have  an average of 1.6 downstream connections. All else being equal, nodes with  more  downstream connections such as kernels here should be more conservative, because  their activity can bring more consequences. If they are changed, it is more likely that  something will go wrong. One model to explain this idea was proposed by Rupert Riedl  [98]. In this model, Riedl raised the idea of "burden" which states that the evolvability  of a  character change during evolution depends on the importance of the functions and  structures depending on it. The "kernels" of the gene regulatory networks which deter- mine  the phylo-Ievel body plan are thought to have "heavier" burden than other parts  of gene regulatory works, since it is the base of animal body plan. So "kernels" are likely  to be more conserved.  
Level 1 :Kemels  Level 2:Plug-ins  Level 3: II0s  6 8  10  ·FOXA,KRO~GATAE  ewNT8, TCF, GSK-3 eaELTA  12 14 16 18 20 22  Time (hours)  47  Figure 3.4 The earliest appearance time of regulatory genes for kernels, plug-ins and l/Os  as experimental data available(Davidson et al., 2002).  
- 0.45 ,-----.--.--.-----r-.,.----,-----.-;:;;;;;;:;;~~~  Kernels  0.40 Plug-ins  II0s  0.35 Batteries  0.30  en 0.25  ~  Z 0.20  "'C  a:-0.15  0.10  0.05  0.00 
.,-..L-LjJ ......... '-¥"''- 0.00  0.05  0.10 0.15  0.20  0.25  dN/dS  48  Figure 3.5 The distribution of dN/dS for each hierarchical level. P(dN/dS) is the proba- bility of a  gene with the dN/dS in specific hierarchical level.  3.3.3 Time of appearance of regulatory genes  As additional supporting evidence, the time of appearance of regulatory genes is  considered during embryo development. From available experiment data, the earliest  appearance time of regulatory genes is shown, defined as the time when a  given gene is  expressed and starts to regulate the expression of other genes. Figure 3.4 shows the  
49  endomesoderm specification up to 22 hours for genes listed in Table 3.1. The x-axis is  appearance time of genes in embryo development, and the y-axis indicates in what hierar- chicallevel genes belong to.  The kernel genes generally express earlier in endomesoderm  than other regulatory genes, and most plug-ins genes appear earlier than I/Os genes.  The Karl Ernst von Baer's law states that "General characteristics of the group to which  an embryo belongs develop before special characteristics. General structural relations  are likewise formed before the most specific appear." That is: differentiation proceeds  from  the general to particular, with taxonomically more general parts expressed earlier  in development. In this case, we can interpret as the kernels which expressed earliest in  development are more related  to the higher hierarchical level of taxon such as phylum- and superphylum-Ievel body plan, while others are more likely related to lower hierarchi- cal level  body plan. Genes which are expressed earlier in development are, mostly likely,  older  and more likely to be conserved during evolution, because mutations of proteins  expressed earlier in embryo development are more likely  to have larger, more pervasive,  
50  and more deleterious effects on subsequent development [132].  3.4 Discussion  Recently, it has been found that biological networks are not random and unstructured  networks, instead, many are modular networks  [86]. Modular network can be decomposed  into several highly interacting modules  and are particularly interesting. Perturbations  or errors in a  modular network are typically restricted  to one module, and the effect on  the whole network is limited. Modular networks can evolve by rewiring the modules.  This rewiring capability property tends  to make modular networks more evolvable [58,  113]. A hierarchical network is an advanced modular network. In hierarchical networks,  some modules are key modules  that may relate to the core function and be resistant to  mutation. Other modules are periphery modules that may be more likely affected by the  environmental change [96]. Peripheral modules evolve rapidly and allow the organism to  survive in a  changing environment.  
51  The origin of animal body plan is one of the central questions in developmental  biology  [13]. A long studied subject, it seems established that evolutionary rates of  different characters  and lineages are different. The results in Figs. 3.3 support Davidson  and Erwin's theory that the hierarchical structure of the gene regulatory network has  imposed constraints  on the rate of further evolution of the most basic, and earliest-evolved  features.  The slow speed of evolution of the kernels that control the development of  animal phylum- and superphylum-Ievel body plan characteristics is  why no new phylum- level  body plans appeared after the pre-Cambrian period. The number of types of classes,  orders, families  and species is increasing, and The results show that this observation is  surprisingly consistent with  the increasing evolutionary speed from kernels to plug-ins  to l/Os to batteries. We propose that the slow evolution of the top components and  fast evolution of the bottom components of the hierarchy is a  universal phenomenon  in evolution,  not only in the gene regulatory networks, but also in protein interaction  networks, cell signaling networks,  and metabolic networks [34].  
52  Table 3.1 Evotionary rate of regularoty genes in pairs of organisms (Org.1 and Org.  2).  Group 1 are kernels, group 2 are plug-ins, group 3 are I/O, group 4 are batteries.  STRPU: Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, PATVU: Patella vulgata, ASTM: Asterina miniata,  HEMPU: Hemicentrotus pulchernmus, PARLI: Paracentrotus lividus, HELER: Heliocidaris ery- throgramma,  HELTB: Heliocidaris tuberculata, LYTVA: Lytechinus variegatus.  
53  Hierarchy  Hierarchy P-value  Kernels Plug-ins  0.0826  Kernels  l/Os  0.0032  Kernels Batteries 0.0092  Kernels  Plug-ins +  l/Os + Batteries  0.0026  Kernels + Plug-ins  l/Os+ Batteries  0.0157  Table 3.2 P-value of Wilcoxon test for different hierarchical levels. The hypothesis for the  Wilcoxon test is that two independent samples come from distributions with the same median.  
Chapter 4  Structure and Response in the World Thade Network  4.1 Introduction  Physical theory of evolution predicts that under certain conditions, a  changing envi- ronment leads  to development of modular structure [113, 63, 76]. The prediction depends  only  on 1) the dynamics of the response to change being "slow" due to a  glassy land- scape,  2) presence of change, and 3) exchange of information between evolving agents.  Since  the trade network is an evolving system, this physics of evolution may be ap- plied  to the world trade system, previously studied by network analysis [67, 16]. We  assume that condition 1  is satisfied for the world trade network due to the complexities  of inter-country relationships. Condition 2  is satisfied by viewing recessions as causing  a  change of  the environment for the dynamics of the world trade system. Condition 3  is satisfied because information  flow naturally results from transfer of business practices  or material between countries. Thus,  the theory of [113, 63] allows us to make three  
55  predictions: decreased modular structure in the world trade network increases the sensi- tivity  to recessionary shocks, decreased modular structure decreases the rate of recovery,  and recessions themselves spontaneously increase modular structure of the world trade  network. All three predictions will be borne  out by data. These results are general  predictions about how the detailed structural parameters of the evolving  economic sys- tern will organize. Theory shows  that the modular and hierarchical structure formed in  response  to environmental fluctuation increases the resistance to and rate of recovery  from perturbations. The theory predicts that globalization, which reduces hierarchical  structure, should lead  to increasingly large recessions and decreased rate of recovery, in  contrast  to standard economic understanding [8].  To apply the physical theory of evolution that describes the spontaneous emergence of  modularity in fluctuating environments  [113, 63] to world trade, we seek a  mathematical  representation of hierarchy in  the world trade network. Identification of network motifs  or modules  is an active research field in the physics of networks [113, 86, 9], with the  
56  study of structure at multiple scales, i.e. hierarchy, somewhat more recent [96, 27]. In this  chapter,  we treat the world trade data as defining a geometry in trade space. We project  the trade topology onto the best tree-like topology representing the data. The success  of this projection in representing the original geometry is  used  to define the hierarchy of  the original data.  We apply hierarchical clustering to construct the best tree-like representation of the  world  trade network. Correlation between the distances implied by the tree construction  and  the distances defined by the original trade data is calculated. This quantity is  termed  the cophenetic correlation coefficient (CCC) [43]. We will display the general trend of  the CCC since 1969, noting especially the increase of the CCC after each recession. The  magnitude of  the CCC will be shown to correlate with the ability of total world GDP to  resist a  recessionary shock. Theory shows that this result is, in fact, causal, not simply  a  correlation, which is  a  major result here.  We focus on how global recessions, such as the 2008-2009 recession, have affected the  
57  structure of the world trade network. Modular structures arises in the trade network,  for example, because countries in a  trade group trade among themselves to a  greater  extent than with others. These trade groups may interact with each other to form higher  level groupings.  The detailed reasons for an increase of hierarchy in the world trade  network are many: perhaps protectionism for the domestic economy [10], or because  long-distance  trade seems costly during a  recession. Standard arguments in economic  theory suggest a  decreased rate of recovery from recession for trade networks with more  modular structure [8]. We will see, however, that theory predicts that greater trade  network structure increases both the resistance to recessionary shocks and the rate of  recovery from recessions.  4.2 Results  4.2.1 Measure of hierarchy by eee  A hierarchical trade network occurs when countries with strong trade connections  group into  trade modules or regional trade clusters. A flat or non-hierarchical structure  
00  In  0 .9  0.8  Paraguay  Ecuador  Colombia  Mexico  Peru  Chile  Argentina  Sri Lanka  Myanmar  Nigeria  Portugal  Angola  Suaan  Jordan  Saudi Arabia  Lebanon  Philippines  Korea Rep.  Lao  P.DemH  Thailand  Indonesia  Singapore  Malaysia  China HK SAR  China  srael  raq  Greece  Turkey  Hungary  ran  ndia  Fm USSR  Finland  Egypt  Fm Yugoslav  Czechoslovak  Spain  Libya  Norway  Sweden  Denmark  Austria  Switz. Liecht  Italy  France,Monac  Fm German FR  Netherlands  Belgium-Lux  Ireland  UK  Australia  Japan  USA  Canada  ~  ~  ~  ~  rl  ~  ~  Algeria  COlombia  Chile  Argentina  Brazil  Israel  Greece  Hungary  Romania  Slovakia  Czech Rep.  Poland  Kazakhstan  Turkey  Ukraine  Russian  Finland  Norway  Denmark  Sweden  Austria  Switzerland  Portugal  Spain  Ireland  UK  Belgium  Netflerlands  Italy  France  Germany  Qatar  South Africa  VietNam  Philippines  Saudi Arabia  United Arab Emirates  India  Thailand  SingaP9 r e  Malaysia  Indonesia  Australia  I China, Hong Kong SAR  I Rep. of Korea .  I Chin a< I  I Japan  I Mexico  I Cana dp  I I I USA .... ~~--l  1 t 0.95 0.9  Cij  0..  0  ~  0)  <:.0  0)  r-1  +.:>  cO  Cf)  Cll 
.~  +.:>  ~  ;:::l  0  u  "d  Cll  +.:>  U  Cll  W  Cf)  H  c.8  ~  H  0  ~  +.:>  Cll  ~  Cll  "d  cO  H  +.:>  4-1  0  ~ 
.S  +.:>  cd  +.:>  ~  Cll  Cf)  Cll  H  0..  ~  Cll  H  H  ;:::l  S  ~  cd  H  §  ~  H  +.:>  "d  +.:>  ~  0  Cll  e- O  t- o  0  ,..;  N  ~  "d  ~  Q)  cd  ~  ~  =  be  ~ 
.1""4  ~  ~  
59  occurs when countries trade evenly with all other countries, and there are no regional  trade modules in the trade network. We use the historical trade data from United  Nation  database (Comtrade) from 1962 to 2007. We build the world trade network with  nodes representing countries  and links representing the trade value. We do not scale  the trade volume by the GDP, because small economic units should not have the same  weight as large economic units. First, a  distance  matrix is calculated from the trade  network matrix by d ij  = M* -M ij , where M* = max(Mij). Here, Mij is trade value  between two countries.  The average linkage hierarchical clustering algorithm is applied  to the distance matrix to produce the tree-like dendrogram [43], see Fig. 4.1. In this  figure,  trade modules are marked by different colors. Only selected countries are plotted,  because  the figure becomes crowded if all countries are plotted. We define the tree-like  structure to have the most hierarchy. Therefore, the amount of hierarchy can be measured  by  the likeness between the original data and the best tree that is  produced from original  data by hierarchical clustering. The CCC quantifies this likeness. The cophenetic matrix  
60  is generated from the dendrogram. Its elements are the branch distance where two  objects become members of  the same cluster in the dendrogram: for two nodes, ij, the  nearest common bifurcation point is  located, and the branch length for this point  is the  cophenetic element of these two nodes, Cij, see Fig. 4.1 for an example. The eee is  and  d are the element and average of elements of the distance matrix, and Cij and care  the elements and average of elements of cophenetic matrix, respectively. Hierarchical  datasets have a  high  eee value, and nonhierarchical datasets have a  low eee value  [74].  4.2.2 Evolution of structure in world trade  A major factor affecting the world trade network over the last 40 years has been the  process of globalization. Qualitatively, this globalization has been expressed as a  "flatten- ing" of  the world [50]. Here, we use the eee to measure how the hierarchical structure  
61  0.92  •  0.3  0.90  \  -Il.  g 0.2  0.88  - I  I-0.1  0.86  U  0.84  U  U  0.82  i 1.2ldO·  2- 0.80  Il.  8 1.Ol1O- 0.78  I  1970 1975 1980 1985 1990   1995 2000 2005  2010  Figure 4.2 The eee from 1969 to 2007. The upper right insert is the ratio of total world  trade to world GDP. The lower left insert is the total world trade in units of US dollar.  
62  of the world trade network has changed over time. Large eee values indicate higher  hierarchy.  The major trend of eee with time in Fig. 4.2 is a  reduction of hierarchy as  the "flattening" has taken place [50]. In Fig. 4.2, shaded rectangles marked the seven  recessions. Left  and right borders are positioned at the start and end of a  recession, re- spectively, according  to US National Bureau of Economic Research. We notice, however,  that the eee does not always decrease year by year. We notice that during and after  each recession, marked on  the figure, the eee value increases. The eee values at the  year after recession are larger  than that at the year before the recession (p-value = 0.003  of Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for null hypothesis  that they are from the same distribution  with  the same mean, and p-value = 0.0006 for null hypothesis that eee value before  recession is larger  than that after recession). This trend is true both for the past 3 ma- jor recessions and for the past 4  minor recessions. The scale of increase of hierarchical  structure depends on the severity of recession. One possible reason for this eee trend  during recessions is  the increase of trade protectionism during recessions. Also, regional  
63  integrations are greatly enhanced during recessions, leading to increased regional imports  [40], which strengthens trade modules. Free trade promotes globalization and decreases  the hierarchy of the trade networks. But trade protectionism and regional integration,  which is  common during recessions  to protect domestic or regional economies by restrain- ing  trade between countries, tends to reduce trade between countries in different trade  modules. Thus, recessions may promote the regionalization that enhances the modularity  of  the trade network. One example is the Asian currency crisis of 1997, which lead to  the development of independent Asian monetary systems.  The eee is  a characterization of the world trade network that is independent from the  total amount of world trade. In the process of globalization, a country tends not only to  increase its total trade value, but also to trade with more partners. The upper right insert  of Fig. 4.2 shows  the typically increasing ratio of world trade to GDP. Only the recessions  of 1981,  1991, 1997  and 2001 lead to a  decrease in the trade to GDP ratio, whereas the  eee increased in all seven recessions. The increased hierarchical structure appearing  
0.14  10  0.12  20  0.1  30  0.08  40  50  0.06  60  0.
04  70  0.Q2  80  90  10  20  30 40  50 60  70  80  90  Europeand  N. Africa  } N' America, Asia  and Oceania  64  Figure 4.3 The trade share matrix S i j = Mi j / (2.:~=1 M i m  + 2.:~=1 M jn ) after hierarchical  clustering between countries  in 2007.  
65  after all seven recessions in Fig. 4.2, is therefore, a  sensitive correlate of recessions, and  independent of  the trade to GDP ratio shown in the upper right insert of Fig. 4.2 and total  trade volume shown in the lower left insert of Fig. 4.2. Measurement of globalization by  both hierarchical structure (CCC) and total trade provides complementary information.  The CCC quantifies the development of hierarchical structure in the trade network  at multiple scales in an integrated way. The clustering of the world trade network shows  the modularity of global trade, see Fig. 4.3. Several modules can be observed: North  American+Asian+Oceanic countries, European+ North African countries, Middle and  South Africa, Middle East, South America, and Central America.  The development  of regional trading partners occurs simultaneously with globalization. By comparing  the structure of  trade network in 1969 and in 2007, we found that the increased trade  among Canada, United States, and Mexico as a  result of NAFTA is one example of a  regional trading group. Regional trade pacts among the Middle East countries are other  examples of regionalization. In general, free trade markets will develop modular structure  
66  at multiple geographical scales.  4.2.3 Response of world trade to recessions  The ability of the trade system to respond to recessionary perturbations is propor- tional  to the hierarchical structure present, i.e. increases with the eee value, according  to the evolutionary theory of modular structure development [113, 63]. That is, the  modular structure that exists at multiple scales affects how recessions propagate in the  trade network, just as modular structure of person-to-person contacts affects how diseases  spread in a  population. We examine how  the network structure affects the propagation  of a  recession  throughout the world. For example, if  there is a  one percentage decrease  of  the CDP of the USA, by how much does the total CDP of world excluding the USA  decrease due to the spread of recession from the USA? We investigate the five most recent  global recessions including the 2007-2009 crisis. We calculate the ratio of CDP change  (percentage) of world excluding  the USA to the CDP change (percentage) of USA in each  
67  recession as a function of the eee value in each recession, see Fig. 4.4(a). In Fig. 4.4(a),  the GDP change in one recession is defined as the GDP decline from peak to trough.  Quarterly  GDP data are used to find the peak ofrecession. The quarterly GDP data for  2001 and 2008 recessions are from DEeD Stat. Extracts (http://stats.oecd.org/). The  quarterly GDP data for earlier recessions are estimated from annual GDP data. We  observe that in more recent recessions with less hierarchical structure of trade network,  a  recession in  the USA has a  stronger impact on the rest of the world. This result indi- cates a  strong positive correlation between lack of hierarchical structure and severity of  recession impact.  We also perform an impulse response analysis of the vector autoregression (VAR)  model  to analyze the time evolution of recession [24, 78, 7]. We explore the possible  underlining causal links between lack of hierarchical structure and severity of recession.  A recession is assumed  to start in the USA. The US GDP is initially reduced by the  maximal  GDP decline during the recession, e.g. the maximal quarterly US GDP decline  
.1810 R8ceuian  -0.5 .'9I1 .• aea-. 
.1880-11111 ReceaIon  II; -0.6  -0.7  0.78 0.81 0.84 0.87  eee  (a)  0.0  ~ ~O.1  8,  c::  IU ·0.2  -5  a..  8 ·0.3  :g  ~ ·0.4 
.2004 
.2008  0.80  •• 909 
.. ~.874 
.'Il00  '-:ol88"  '.1  i 1.0  ,OB  09  0.85  eee  (b)  0.80  0." 0."  CCC  0.90  68  Figure 4.4 (a) The ratio of the total world excluding the USA GDP change (percentage)  to the change of the USA GDP (percentage) in 5 recessions, F in the y axis. (b) Impulse  response analysis of spread of recession.  The world GDP change is plotted as a  function of the  eee. The reduction in the world GDP is greater when the eee value is low. Insert figure:  The GDP recovery from recession can be well fit by the relation Y(t) '" Y(oo) -aexp(-.At).  Yearly recovery rates, .A, are shown versus the eee. In accord with theory, the recovery rate is  positively correlated with the eee.  
69  was 5.4% S in the 2008-2009 recession [6]. The export from country i to country j,  Xij, is updated by a  factor of ratio of GDP of country j at time t, 1j(t), and t  -1,  1j(t -1)) [7]. Thus, Xij(t) = Xij(t -1)1j(t)/1j(t -1). Then the GDP of country i  is updated by Yi(t + 1) = Yi(t) + ~(Xi(t)/ Xi(t -1) -1). Where Pi = XdYi is the  ratio of export to GDP for country i. The GDP of each country decreases until steady  state is reached, at which point the simulation is terminated. We calculate the world  GDP change as CLi r:steady -Li r:initial)/ Li r:initial. We observe how the crisis spreads  globally  and measured the GDP loss during crisis.  The impulse response analysis results support that the severity of the 2008-2009  recession may  be due to loss of hierarchical structure in the global trade network. Lack  of hierarchical  structure makes the world trade network less resistant to recession, as  observed from Fig. 4.4(b).  In the simulation as shown in Fig. 4.4(b), initial values are  set  to historical trade and GDP data in each year. A recession is assumed to begin in  the USA and spread to the rest of the world. We believe this increased sensitivity is due  
70  to a  loss of modular or hierarchical structure in the world trade network, see Fig. 4.2. As  an example, the impact of a  recession on the GDP is more severe in 2006 than in 1968,  by a  factor of 5.7. Interestingly, after  this calculation was carried out, an estimate of  the ratio of the reduction of GDP in 2009 to the average reduction over past recessions  equaling 6  was  reported [6].  Evolutionary theory has shown that systems under environmental perturbation not  only increase  their modularity, but also increase their response function to perturbations  [113, 63]. In the present context, this would imply that as trade has been globalized, and  the eee reduced, the rate of recovery from recession should decrease. We consider this  phenomenon in  the world trade network, using the VAR model. After the system reaches  steady state following the reduction to the USA GDP, we impose a  positive impulse  to restore the USA GDP to its initial value. The world GDP recovers, at a rate that  depends on the hierarchical structure of the trade network. We observe that when the  trade network has greater hierarchical structure, indicated by a  larger eee value, the  
71  trade network recovers more quickly from recession, as shown in the insert figure of Fig.  4.4(b).  4.3 Conclusion  We have used the concept of viewing the world trade network as defining a  geometry  in  trade space and the idea of projecting this geometry to the best tree-like topology  to define the hierarchy in the world trade network. With that necessary mathematical  prolegomena,  we introduced the world trade network as an evolving system. Physics  of evolution in changing environments was  then used to predict that the world trade  network is more sensitive and recovers more slowly from evolutionary shocks now  than  it did 40 years ago, because globalization has reduced hierarchical structure in the world  trade network. We also predict that recession-induced change to the world trade network  should lead  to a  temporarily increased hierarchical structure of the global trade network.  These predictions, contrary  to standard economic thinking, were born out by our study  
72  of the world trade data since 1969.  
73  Part II  Influenza virus evolution  
Chapter 5  Prediction of incipient dominant influenza strain by  clustering  5 .1 Introduction  The recent outbreak of 2009 A(H1N1) caused immediate international attention [33,  52,49, 111]. This new 2009 A(H1N1) virus contains a combination of gene segments from  swine and human influenza viruses[52,  49]. Confirmed infections reached 270,000 globally  as of September 2009[149].  The novel 2009 A(H1N1) strain was defined as a  pandemic  strain by the World health Organization(WHO) in 2009[152], and was the epidemic strain  in  the 2009 Northern winter.  Influenza viruses are hyper-mutating viruses.  It has been estimated that the nu- cleotide  mutation rate per genome per replication is approximately 0.76[37]. Influenza  viruses escape  the human immune system by continual antigenic drift and shift[48, 129,  54,  47, 53, 85]. The quasispecies nature of influenza viruses makes the strain structure  
75  complex[36]. Usually, there is  one or a few dominant influenza strains circulating in the  population for each flu season. The flu vaccine is most effective when it matches this  dominant circulating strain[56,  55]. The degree to which immunity induced by a  vaccine  protects against a  different viral strain  is determined by the antigenic distance between  the vaccine and the virus. Due to evolution of the antigenic regions of the influenza virus,  the composition of the flu vaccine is  typically modified annually[100]. However, since the  influenza strains used in the flu vaccine are decided 6  months before the flu season, a  mismatch between the vaccine strain and dominant circulating strain may occur if the  virus evolves significantly. Such a  situation arose for the H3N2 virus in the 2009-2010  flu season, when A/British Columbia/RV1222/2009 emerged in the early spring[108, 2].  Accurate early prediction of the dominant circulating strain is an essential and important  task in influenza research.  There are several ways  to estimate the flu vaccine effectiveness. Gupta et al. [55]  proposed Pepitope as a  measure of antigenic distance between influenza A vaccine and  
76  circulating strains.  The hemagglutinin protein has five epitopes. The dominant epitope  for a  particular circulating strain in a  particular season was taken as  that which had the  largest fractional change in amino acid sequence relative to the vaccine strain. The value  of Pepitope is defined as the fraction of number of amino acid differences in the dominant  epitope  to total number of amino acids in the dominant epitope. The antigenic distance  between  the vaccine strain and the circulating strain is quantified by Pepitope' By a  metaanalysis of historical vaccine efficacy  data from over 50 publications, Gupta et al.  showed in a  metaanalysis that the Pepitope between vaccine strain and circulating strain  correlates well with  the vaccine efficacy, with R2 > 0.8[55].  Understanding  the evolution of influenza viruses has benefited from phylogenetic re- constructions of  the hemagglutinin protein evolution[lOl, 47]. In an alternative approach,  Lapedes  and Farber[79]' followed by Smith et al.[llO], applied a  technique called mul- tidimensional scaling  to study antigenic evolution of influenza. Plotkin et al. clustered  hemagglutinin protein sequences using  the single-linkage clustering algorithm and found  
11  that influenza viruses group into clusters[94].  Here,  we present a  low-dimensional clustering method that can detect the cluster  containing  an incipient dominant strain for an upcoming flu season before the strain be- comes dominant.  The method builds upon the dimensional projection technique used by  Lapedes  and Farber[79] and Smith et at. [110] to characterize hemagglutination inhibition  data. Importantly, the present method requires only sequence data, unlike the approach  of Lapedes  and Farber [79] and Smith et at. [110], which require ferret hemagglutination  inhibition assay  data. In this paper, we first study the evolution of 2009 A(H1N1) by an  evolutionary path map which leads to a  suggestion for the H1N1 vaccine strain. Then,  we introduce the low-dimensional protein sequence clustering method. We propose an  influenza vaccine selection procedure based on this sequence clustering. The procedure  is  demonstrated and tested in detail using historical data. We show the performance of  the method to predict the dominant H3N2 strain in an upcoming flu season using data  solely from before the flu season, on data since 1996. We compare the results to those  
78  from existing methods since 1996. In the discussion section, we discuss the relationship  between  the protein sequence clustering method and previous approaches. We discuss  the false positive rate, as well as other challenges.  5.2 Results  5.2.1 Evolutionary path of 2009 A(H1N1) influenza  We first construct the directional evolutionary path for the 2009 A(H1N1) influenza.  We use high resolution data in sequence, time, and world spatial coordinate to construct  this evolutionary relationship. Since its first detection,  the 2009 A(H1N1) virus has been  extensively sequenced[52,  49J. By May 1, 2009, the number of confirmed cases reported  by WHO was 333[149J. At  the same time, the sequenced hemagglutinin protein (HA)  available in NCBI Influenza Resources Database were 312[14J;  that is to say most of the  confirmed cases at that time were sequenced. At July 1, 2009, the ratio of sequenced  HA protein  to confirmed cases by WHO was 1039/77201[149]' a  number which is still  much larger  than that for seasonal flu. In addition, the Influenza Resources Database  
79  contains the date of collection of each 2009 A(H1N1) virus strain. We reconstruct the  evolutionary history of swine flu viruses with the following procedure. If strain B is  mutated from strain A, we term strain A "founder" and strain B "F1" We align the HA  proteins of all 2009 A(H1N1) strains. Then, for each strain,  we find its founder strain  based on  the following four criteria: 1, the founder strain should appear earlier than the  strain, as judged by collection date; 2, the founder strain should have only one amino acid  difference in  the HAl protein relative to the F1 strain; 3, the founder should also have  the most similar nucleotide sequence relative to F1; and 4, the founder strain should have  a  large number of identical copies circulating in human population, as approximated by  the number of different strains with identical HA sequences in the Influenza Resources  Database.  By applying these four criteria to 2009 A(H1N1) influenza, we construct  the directional evolutionary path map, as shown in Fig. 5.1. In this figure, several  strains are  notated (Strain #1: A/California/05/2009; Strain #2: A/California/04/2009;  Strain #7: A/California/07/2009; Strain #12: A/Texas/05/2009; Strain #28: A/New  
80  York/19/2009). Strains from the Northern and Southern hemisphere are shown as red  dots and blue dots respectively. One branch represents one substitution in the amino  acid sequence. Two clusters are observed in Fig. 5.1 :  one around A/New York/19/2009  (#28), and another one around A/Texas/05/2009 (#12). Most new strains are from the  Northern hemisphere, and strains from the Southern hemisphere are mainly located  at the  edge of the map, such as strain #96, #120, and #126. That the Southern hemisphere  strains appear  at the boundary of the figure provides a  self-consistency check of the  validity of the assumptions entering the construction of this figure. Geographically,  we  see many founder to F1 links are from US and Mexico to other countries, but we rarely  see founder  to F1 links that are from other countries to US and Mexico, or from other  countries  to other countries except US and Mexico (see Materials and Methods). We  also found that strains with more F1 in Fig. 5.1 are more frequently seen in the human  population. For example, in the Influenza Resources Database,  we found 153 strains to  be identical with A/New York/19/2009, which has 29 F1 strains, and 120 strains to be  
81  identical with  A/Texas/05/2009, which has 24 F1 strains. We can see in Fig. 5.1 that  A/Texas/05/2009 is at the very upstream of the map, with downward connections to most  of the other strains by direct or two-step links. This result agrees with the US Food and  Drug Administration[44] recommendation of  A/Texas/05/2009 as a  vaccination strain.  The alternative vaccine strain A/California/7/2009 (#7) has fewer F1 strains and it is  not located at the center of the network.  5.2.2 Low-dimensional clustering  We use a low-dimensional clustering method to visualize the antigenic distance matrix  of the viruses. We use a  statistical tool called "multidimensional scaling" [43]. This  method was used by Lapedes and Farber[79] and Smith et al. [110] to project ferret  hemagglutination inhibition assay  data to low dimensions. The influenza viral surface  glycoprotein hemagglutinin  is a  primary target of the protective immune response. Here  we project the hemagglutinin protein sequence data, rather than animal model data, to  
82  Figure 5.1 The evolutionary path of 2009 A(HINl) influenza.  
83  low dimensions. The HAl protein of influenza with 329 residues can be considered as a  329-dimension space.  The multidimensional scaling method is  applied to rescale the 329- dimension space  to a  2-dimensional space, so that we can plot and visualize it. First, we  do a  multialignment of the HAl proteins. Then, the distance between any two proteins  is  calculated as  (5.1)  where  Si,m is the amino acid of protein i at position m. The term 6 Si ,m,Sj,m is 1 if amino  acids of protein  i and j at position m are the same. Otherwise, it is O. For the 2009 H1N1  viruses,  we consider the entire HA protein, and N = 566. For H3N2 viruses, we consider  only  the HAl protein, and N = 329, because the entire HA proteins are not completely  sequenced in many cases. Thus,  d ij  is the number of amino acid differences between HA  proteins normalized by length. The multidimensional scaling produces a  protein distance  map, for example, Fig. 5.2(b). In this map, each  data point represents a flu strain isolate.  
84  0.008  0.004 
.. ..)..  0.002 
....  0.000  rI 
.~yor1ct1.  -0.002  ••  -0 .004 III  ·2 
..  -0.006  •  • 
..  -0.008  -8  ~  -0.010  10  -0.012 
."  -0.010 -0.005 0.000 0.005 0.010  0_  OD'  0 0 1.\  (a) (b)  Figure 5.2 (a),  Kernel density estimation for the protein distance map of 2009 A(HIN1)  influenza as of December 5, 2009. (b), The protein distance map of 2009 A(HIN1) influenza.  The Euclidean distance between two points in the map approximates the protein distance  in Equation 5.1 between these two fiu strains (see Materials and Methods for details of  this distance approximation procedure). Two closely located points imply two strains  with similar HA protein sequences.  We  apply the low-dimensional clustering method to study 2009 A(H1N1). In  Fig. 5.2,  the vertical and horizontal axes of both figures represent protein distance as defined in  Equation 5.1. A 0.0018 unit of protein distance equals one substitution in the HA protein  
85  sequence of H1Nl. The height and colors in Fig. 5.2{a) both represent the density of  isolates.  We plot the protein distance map in Fig. 5.2{b). Both A/Texas/05/2009 and  A/New York/19/2009 are located near the center of the cluster, in good agreement with  the observation from Fig. 5.1 that they are the founder strains for many F1 strains.  To detect the clusters in  the protein distance map, we use a  statistical method known  as kernel density estimation[43]. Kernel density estimation is a  non-parametric method  to estimate the probability density function from which data come. The kernel density  figure is produced from  the protein distance map, and it shows the density of influenza  strains in sequence space.  We plot the kernel density as the three dimensional shaded  surface. For example, the kernel density surface Fig. 5.2{a) is  produced from Fig. 5.2{b).  The x and y axes in Fig. 5.2{a) are the same as that in Fig. 5.2{b) and are protein  distance coordinates. The  z dimension measures the density of flu strains around point  (x, y). We use the surface height and the colors to represent z values, and the color is  proportional to surface height. A peak in kernel density Fig. 5.2{a) indicates a cluster of  
86  related flu strains in the protein distance map Fig. 5.2(b)  There are two significant clusters in the Fig. 5.2(a), as two peaks are observed. The  cluster on  the left side contains A/Texas/05/2009. Another cluster on the right side  contains A/New York/19/2009.  The 2009 A(H1Nl) virus has evolved slowly to date. The  greatest  Pepitope antigenic distance between A/Texas/05/2009 and all sequenced strains  is measured  to be < 0.08. Values  of Pepitope less than 0.45 for H1Nl indicate positive  expected vaccine efficacy  [92] ,  and so a  vaccine is expected to be efficacious. All of the  amino acids in all  five epitopes of a  strain of A/Texas/05/2009 and a  strain of A/New  York/19/2009 are the same. Multidimensional scaling predicts  that A/Texas/05/2009  will be  the dominant strain in the 2009-2010 season, and that A/Texas/05/2009 is a  suitable strain for vaccination.  Our focus is on the expected vaccine effectiveness, as it can  be judged from antisera hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay or sequence  data alone.  We do not consider other aspects such as growth in hen's eggs or other manufacturing  constraints. Laboratory growth and passage  data are needed to address these aspects.  
87  5.2.3 H3N2 virus evolution for 38 years  We construct the protein distance map to determine the evolution of influenza A(H3N2)  virus from 1969  to 2007. Sequences of HAl proteins were downloaded from the Influenza  Virus Resources database[l4].  We use the multidimensional clustering method[79] to  generate  the protein distance map and corresponding kernel density estimation in Fig.  5.3. Smith  et ai.[llO] produced a  similar graph using ferret antisera HI assay data.  The figure presented here has a  higher resolution, and more clusters are observed, be- cause protein sequences  data are more abundant and accurate than antisera HI assay  data. The evolution of influenza tends to group strain into clusters. In Fig. 5.3, the  vertical and horizontal axes of both figures represent protein distance as defined in  Equation 5.1. A 0.0030 unit of protein distance equals one substitution in  the HAl  protein sequence of H3N2. The colors in Fig. 5.3(a) represent the time of collection  of  the isolates. The colors and height in Fig. 5.3(b) represent the density of isolates.  
88  we identified 14 major clusters by setting a  cutoff value of kernel density for the past  38 years from 1969 to 2007. Each cluster is named after the first vaccine strain in  the cluster. For example, HK68: Hongkong/1/68, EN72: England/42/72, VT75: Vic- toria/3/75, TX77: Texas/1/77, BK79: Bangkok/1/79, PP82: Philippines/2/82, SC87:  Sichuan/2/87, BJ89: Beijing/32/92, SD93:  Shandong/9/93, JB94: Johannesburg/33/94,  WH95: Wuhan359/95, SN97: Sydney/5/97, PM99:  Panama/2007/99, FJ02: Fujian/411/2002;  The average duration time for a  cluster is therefore 2.7 years, which is also the approx- imate duration of a  vaccine. We marked each cluster by  the first vaccine strain in the  cluster. There are apparent gaps between clusters. The antigenic distance between two  strains in two separate clusters  is larger than the distances within the same cluster. The  influenza virus evolves within one cluster before jumping from one cluster to another  cluster. This dynamics occurs because small  antigenic drift by one or a  few sequential  mutations does not lead  the virus to completely escape from cross immunity induced by  vaccine protection or prior exposure.  
89  For vaccine design, when the viruses evolve as a  quasispecies in the same cluster, the  vaccine that is targeted to the cluster provides protection. This protection decreases with  antigenic distance. When the viruses jump to a  new cluster by antigenic drift or shift,  one would  want to update the vaccine to provide protection against strains in the new  cluster.  In Fig. 5.3(a), the arrows point to the exact position of vaccine strains. It can  be seen that the positions of vaccine strains are near the center of clusters. It can be  shown mathematically that choosing the consensus strain of a  cluster as vaccine strain  minimizes the Pepitope antigenic distance between vaccine strain and cluster strains, and  thus maximizes expected vaccine efficacy[55].  5.2.4 Influenza vaccine strain selection  We now use the low-dimensional  sequence clustering method in an effort to detect a  new flu  strain before it becomes dominant. A question of interest in the influenza research  is  whether we can predict which strain will be dominant in the next flu season based on  
0.08  0.04  0.00  -0.04  -0.08  -0.08 -0.04  (a)  -0'  (b)  0.00 0.04  I  oo!\  0.08  1968  1973  1978  1983  1988  1992  1997  2002  2007  90  Figure 5.3 (a) The protein distance map and (b) corresponding Kernel density estimation  of influenza from 1968 to 2007.  
91  the information we have at present. The WHO gathers together every February to make  a  recommendation for influenza strains  to be used in vaccine for next flu season in the  Northern hemisphere. The vaccine is  expected to have high efficacy if the chosen strain is  dominant in the next flu season. The recommendation is especially challenging to make  when  the dominant strain in next flu season has not been dominant before February of  that year. For example, in mid-March 2009, a  new H3N2 strain appeared[108, 2], which  infected a  significant fraction of  the population in the Southern hemisphere.  The current accepted influenza vaccine strain selection procedure is as follows [100].  Isolates samples are collected by WHO GISN and are characterized antigenically using  the hemagglutination inhibition(HI) assay. About 10% of samples are also sequenced in  HAl domain of HA gene. Antigenic maps are constructed from the HI assay data using  dimensional projection technique. Examination of  HI data is not dependent on analysis  using dimensional projection,  but rather, the primary HI data may carry the most weight.  If  the vaccine does not match the current circulating strains, the vaccine is updated to  
92  contain one representative of the circulating strains. The emerging variant strains are  identified.  If the antigenically distinct emerging variants are judged to be the dominant  strains  in the upcoming season, the vaccine is updated to include one representative of  emerging variants.  The key issue and major difficulty is how to judge whether emerging  variants will  be the dominant variants in next season. If a  fourfold difference in antisera  HI titer between the vaccine strain and the emerging strains is observed, the emerging  strain is to be determined to be dominant strains in upcoming season, and an updated  vaccine is recommended to include the emerging strains [100] .  Here,  we propose a  modified vaccine selection process based on clustering detection.  First,  we apply the multidimensional scaling to make a  protein distance map from HAl  sequences, instead of constructing an antigenic map from HI assay data. Then, we  use kernel density estimation to determine the clusters of strains. If the vaccine does  not match the current circulating cluster, the vaccine is updated to contain the current  circulating strain.  If the vaccine matches the current circulating cluster, but an emerging  
93  cluster is judged likely to be the major cluster in the upcoming season, the vaccine is  updated to contain the consensus strain of the emerging cluster. We judge whether a  cluster is  an emerging dominant cluster by two criteria. The first criterion is that this  cluster can  be detected by kernel density estimation, and is  separate from the cluster that  contains the current circulating strain or vaccine strain. A cluster that can be detected  by kernel density estimation usually contains a  central  strain that has multiple identical  copies and some  Fl strains that are closely related to the central strain. An example  is  the cluster of A/Texas/05/2009(HINl) in Fig. 5.1. A/Texas/05/2009(H1Nl) is the  central strain, which has 120 strains with identical HA protein sequences in the Influenza  Virus Resource database[14].  A/Texas/05/2009(HINl) also has 29 Fl strains with one  amino acid different. So, A/Texas/05/2009(H1Nl)  and the surrounding strains form a  cluster as  we detected in Fig. 5.2 by kernel density estimation ..  The second criterion is that the current vaccine strain does not match the consensus  strain of the cluster and is estimated to provide low protection against strains in the  
94  cluster. That is, an immune response stimulated by a  vaccine cannot effectively protect  against infection by sufficiently distant by new strains.  The consensus strain is  a  protein  sequence that shows which residues are most abundant in the multialignment at each  position.  The efficacy of current vaccine to the new cluster can be estimated from ferret  antisera  HI assay data. However, the antisera data has low resolution and has an im- perfect correlation  to vaccine effectiveness in humans[157, 55]. Instead, we use Pepitope,  which is  calculated as the fraction of mutations in dominant epitope, to estimate vaccine  efficacy  and which has a  more robust correlation to vaccine effectiveness in human than  do ferret HI data[55]. When the Pepitope between the current vaccine strain and consensus  strain of  the new cluster is larger than 0.19, expected vaccine efficacy decreases to 0 for  H3N2 influenza,  and the current vaccine cannot be expected to provide protection from  new strains. As  the examples shown below, our method can detect an incipient dominant  strain at its very early stage, and the method appears to require about 10 sequences in  the new cluster for detection.  
95  5.2.5 Demonstration of low-dimensional sequence clustering method.  We demonstrate the method of detecting the A/Fujian/411/2002(H3N2) strain. The  A/Panama/2007/1999 had been the vaccination strain for four flu seasons between 2000  and 2004 in the Northern hemisphere. The vaccine strain was replaced by A/Fujian/411/2002  in the 2004-2005 flu season, as described in Table 5.1. The vaccine strain in the 2003- 2004 season was  A/Panama/2007/1999, while the dominant circulating strain became  A/Fujian/411/2002(H3N2).  This mismatch resulted in a  large decrease  in vaccine effi- cacy in the 2003-2004 flu season[55]. The vaccine efficacy is estimated to be only 12%[3].  We test whether our method can detect A/Fujian/411/2002(H3N2) as an incipient dom- inant strain before it actually became dominant. We use only virus sequence data before  October  1, 2003. We did not use any virus data collected in 2003-2004 season. Therefore,  our prediction and results are made without any knowledge from what happened in the  2003-2004 season. We plot the protein distance map of the 2001-2002 flu season in Fig.  
96  5.4(d). To detect the clusters, we plot the kernel density in Fig. 5.4(b) for the data in  Fig. 5.4(d). There are two separate significant clusters.  The one with the largest kernel  density on  the left contains the current dominant strain A/Panama/2007/1999 and the  widespread A/Moscow/10/1999 strain. The smaller one on the right is a  new cluster,  which contains A/Fujian/411/2002. Using the data as of September 30, 2002, we seek  to determine whether the new cluster  on the right in Figs. 5.4(b) and (d) will be the  next dominant strain after A/Panama/2007/1999. We determine whether this cluster  fulfills the two criteria above. First, this new cluster can be significantly detected by  kernel density estimation. This cluster is  separate from  the current dominant strain, as  we can see in figure. Second, we calculated the average Pepitope of the new cluster on the  right with regard  to A/Moscow/10/1999, A/Panama/2007/1999 and A/Fujian/411/2002  to be 0.214,  0.1214, and 0.083, respectively. This means the current vaccine contains  A/Moscow/10/1999  is expected to provide little protection against viruses in the new  cluster. This result makes  the new cluster fulfill the second criterion. Thus, we pre- 
97  dict based on the data as of September 30, 2002, that the cluster on the right in Fig.  5.4(d) will be  the next dominant cluster. This prediction was made on data collected  one year earlier  than when the A/Fujian/411/2002 became dominant in the 2003-2004  season. To further  support our prediction, in Fig. 5.4( c), we plot the protein distance  map from October 1, 2002, to February 1, 2003, right before the WHO selected the  vaccine strain for 2003-2004 season. To detect the clusters, we plot the kernel in Fig.  5.4(a) for  the data in Fig. 5.4(c). There are two separate major clusters observed in  the kernel density estimation in Fig. 5.4(a). The left cluster has the current dominant  strain of A/Panama/2007/1999 and also A/Moscow /10/1999. The right cluster has the  A/Fujian/411/2002. We calculated the average Pepitope of the right new cluster with  regards  to A/Moscow/10/1999, A/Panama/2007/1999, and A/Fujian/411/2002 to be  0.2725, 0.1811,  and 0.0367 respectively. This result further supports the prediction that  the new cluster will become dominant, and A/Fujian/411/2002, which is the most fre- quent  strain in the new cluster, will be or is  very close to the next dominant strain. This  
98  suggestion proceeds the vaccine component switch by 1-2 years, as shown in Table 5.1.  5.2.6 Prediction for H3N2 influenza in 2009-2010.  By applying our method to the 2008-2009 flu season, we predict that the domi- nant H3N2 strain in the 2009-2010 flu season may switch. Based on the flu activity in  the 2008-2009 flu season, the WHO made the recommendation in February 2009 that  A/Brisbane/10/2007(H3N2) should be used as the vaccine[150]. However, a  new strain  evolved just after the recommendation was published. The British Columbia Center for  Disease Control  detected a new virus strain[108, 2] with 3 mutations in antigenic sites (two  in epitope B and one in epitope D). Since this new strain is relatively far from the vaccine  strain, with Pepitope = 0.095, vaccine efficacy is  expected to decrease to 20%[55,33]. How- ever, since  the mutations in this new strain "do not fulfill the criteria proposed by Cox  as corresponding  to meaningful  antigenic drift" [108, 28], and this strain still remained  the minority of H3N2 viruses in July 2009, health authorities were not certain that this  
Fig ure 5.4  (b)  0 .015 1 2001  Oct 1 _ 2002 Sep 30  0.010  •  • 
. -ti. · 
.,.::  0.005  0.000  · ·· ... r-
........  : . .  ~.OO5  ••••  ••  •  ~.010 ._ 
.  ~.015 •  •  ~.05 ~.04 ~.03 ~.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 .{).04 ~.03 ~.02 ~.01 0 .00 0 .01 0 .02  (c) (d)  (02$  0 0)  99  (a) Kernel density estimation and (c) protein distance map for H3N2 viruses  between  October 1, 2002 and February 1,  2003. (b) Kernel density estimation and (d) protein  distance  map for H3N2 viruses between October 1, 2001, and September 9, 2002. A 0.0030 unit  of protein distance equals one substitution of the HAl protein sequence of H3N2.  
100  new strain would replace the current dominant strain in 2009-2010 flu season. We use  our  method to investigate whether this new strain will be the next dominant strain. We  construct the protein distance map as shown in Fig. 5.5(c). We plot the kernel density es- timation in Fig. 5.5(a) for data in Fig. 5.5(c). By the data up to June 14, 2009, we see two  major clusters in Fig. 5.5(a). The larger one on the right contains the current dominant  strain A/Brisbane/10/2007, and the left one is a  new cluster which contains A/British  Columbia/RV1222/2009. It is apparent that this new cluster is separate from the current  dominant cluster. Thus, this cluster fulfills the first criterion. We calculated the aver- age of  Pepitope of strains in the left new cluster with regards to A/Brisbane/10/2007 and  A/British Columbia/RV1222/2009 to be 0.103 and 0.042 respectively. The vaccine that  contains A/Brisbane/10/2007 has an expected efficacy of 20% to the virus strains in the  new cluster. Thus, this new cluster satisfies both two criteria, and so we predict that this  cluster which contains  A/British Columbia/RV1222/2009 will be the dominant cluster in  the 2009-2010 season. The earliest time for us to make this prediction is  March 30, 2009.  
101  In Fig. 5.5{d) and (b), we already see this new cluster on the left side of figure, though  since there are only  about 10 sequences in the new cluster, the kernel density of this  new cluster is smaller  than that in the dominant cluster. This strain was mentioned as a  concern on 5 May 2009, although by conventional methods  the strain was not considered  a  potentially new dominant strain in July 2009[108].  With the method of the present  paper, this new cluster is  suggested earlier using  the data as of March 30, 2009.  5.2.7 Comparison with previous results.  Here we present a  historical test of the method. For each flu season in the North  Hemisphere from 1996,  we use only the H3N2 sequences data until February 1, before  WHO published the recommendation for vaccine. We use the low dimensional cluster- ing  to made the prediction for the dominant strain. The conventional method as used  by  WHO is phylogenetic analysis combined with ferret antisera HI assay. In Table 5.1,  we compare the method with the conventional method. This table includes the H3N2  
102  -+-==;::=====;===;===r=---.oc:!~  00)  002 ~.O, 0 .01 003  (a)  (b)  0 .020  0 .020  3108 Oct 1 - 200II .lin 14  2008  Oct 1 - 200II Mlr 30  0 .015  •••  0.015  -..- -.  •  0.010  ~eo....-vtZDnOOO  ,ra 
.+ 
..  0.010  /  ••  0.005  , 
.  • • 
.  •  • 
... :;  0.005 
.: ...  •  0.000  V  •  0.000 
.(1.005 
.(1.010  _eau_12ZIt2OOII 
.... 
.(1.005 
........  •  • 
. .. 
.(1.015 
.(1.010 
.(1.020 
... 
.(1.015 
.(1.03 '()'02 
.().O,  0.00  0.0'  0.02 
.(1.03 
.(1.02 
.().O,  0.00  0.01 0.02  (c)  (d)  Figure 5.5  (a) Kernel density estimation and (c) protein distance map for H3N2 viruses  from  October 1,2008, to June 14, 2009. (b) Kernel density estimation and (d) protein distance  map for H3N2 viruses between October 1, 2008, and March 30, 2009. A 0.0030 unit of protein  distance equals one substitution of the HAl protein sequence of H3N2.  
103  vaccine strains, our prediction of dominant strains, the reported dominant circulating  H3N2 strains[133, 134,  135, 136,  137, 138, 139,  140, 141,  142, 143, 145,  146,  147, 148,  151]' and  the circulating subtypes in the northern hemisphere[133, 134, 135, 136, 137,  138, 139,  140,  141,  142,  143, 145, 146,  147,  148, 151]. Circulating H3N2 strains are  absent if  the dominant subtype is HI or influenza B. The reported dominant H3N2  strains  and circulating subtypes data are from WHO Weekly Epidemiological Record  (http://www.who.int/wer/en/). In the most recent 14 flu seasons, influenza subtype  H3 was dominant in  10. The WHO H3N2 vaccine component matches the circulating  strains in 8  seasons. Our predictions match  the circulating strains in 9  seasons. In  1997-1998 season, a  novel  flu strain Sydney /5/97 was found in June 1997. Because no  similar strains were collected before February  1, neither of the two methods can pre- dict it. In 2003-2004 season, our method predicts Fujian/441/2002 as  the dominant  strain, while phylogenetic analysis combined with ferret antisera HI assay did not. For  all other 8 seasons dominated by influenza subtype H3,  the predictions of both methods  
104  matched the dominant circulating strain. The 2009-2010 influenza season was domi- nated by H1Nl. But data from local outbreaks of H3N2 infections[108, 2] showed that  the dominant H3N2 strain was A/British Columbia/RV1222/2009, as predicted in Table  5.1,  rather than the vaccine strain A/Brisbane/10/2007. For the 2010-2011 season, we  recommend A/British Columbia/RV1222/2009 as a vaccine strain, and the WHO recom- mended  A/Perth/16/2009. These two strains are in the same cluster and antigenic ally  similar with a  small  Pepitope = 0.048. Although these two strains are slightly different,  the vaccine is expected to be effective.  
Flu season Vaccine strain  Our prediction  Circulating  Circulating  from WHO[150]  H3N2 strain subtype  1996-1997  Wuhan/359/95  Wuhan/359/95  Wuhan/359/95  H3  1997-1998  Wuhan/359/95  Wuhan/359/95 Sydney/5/97  H3  1998-1999  Sydney/5/97 Sydney/5/97  Sydney/5/97  H3  1999-2000  Sydney/5/97 Sydney/5/97  Sydney/5/97  H3  2000-2001  Panama/2007/1999  Panama/2007/1999  N/A  HI  2001-2002  Panama/2007/1999  Panama/2007/1999  Panama/2007/1999  H3  2002-2003  Panama/2007/1999  FUjian/ 411/2002  N/A  HI  2003-2004 Panama/2007 /1999 Fujian/411/2002  FUjian/  411 /2002  H3  2004-2005  FUjian/ 411/2002  Fujian/411/2002  FUjian/411/2002  H3  2005-2006  California/7/2004  California/7/2004  California/7/2004  H3  2006-2007  Wisconsin/67/2005  Wisconsin/67/2005  Wisconsin/67/2005  H3  2007-2008 Wisconsin/67/2005 Wisconsin/67/2005  N/A  HI  2008-2009  Brisbane/1O/2007  Brisbane/l0/2007 Brisbane/1O/2007  H3  2009-2010 Brisbane/l0/2007  BritishColumbia/RVI222/09 BritishColumbia/RVI222/09  HI  2010-2011  Perth/16/2009  BritishColumbia/RVI222/09  N/A N/A  Table 5.1  Summary of results  I-'  0  01  
106  5.2.8 Detecting A/Wellington/1/2004 in the 2004 flu season in the Southern  hemisphere  The low-dimensional clustering can also be applied to influenza in the Southern hemi- sphere. As  an example, we test our method on the 2004 flu season. The recommended  H3N2 vaccine strain by WHO used in  the 2004 flu season in the Southern hemisphere was  A/Fujian/411/2002.  Data from the surveillance network suggested that the circulating  dominant flu strain in  the 2004 season in Southern hemisphere was A/Fujian/411/2002,  and a  late surge of  A/Wellington/l/2004 was also observed. For example, in Argentina,  a study showed that about 50% of infections were closely related to A/Fujian/411/2002  and another 50% were closely related to A/Wellington/l/2004[102]. In New Zealand, the  dominant flu  strain was A/Fujian/411/2002 which caused 78% of flu infections[4]' and  a  late season surge of A/Wellington/l/2004 was also reported[l]. Therefore, the vaccine  recommended by WHO matches  the dominant strain and would be expected to have  vaccine efficacy in  the 2004 season in Southern hemisphere.  
107  We here use the low-dimensional clustering method to detect the A/Wellington/1/2004  strain, which is not the major dominant strain but caused significant infections in the  2004 flu season. We plot the protein distance and kernel density estimation for the  H3N2 viruses in Fig. 5.6(d) and (b). We use the data only as of February 1, 2004, 3  months prior to the 2004 flu Southern hemisphere season, which is usually from May  to September. We observed two clusters. The major cluster on the left side of Fig.  5.6(d) is A/Fujian/411/2002-like, which was  the vaccine strain in 2004 season. There is  a  new cluster  in the right side of Fig. 5.6( d) which contains A/Wellington/1/2004. The  Pepitope of A/Wellington/1/2004 with regards to A/Fujian/411/2002 is 0.118. Therefore,  we predict  that A/Wellington/1/2004 will infect a  large fraction of the population, and  the A/Fujian/411/2002 vaccine is expected to provide only partial protection against  the A/Wellington/1/2004 virus. However, since the appearance of A/Wellington/1/2004  was just before the the 2004 flu season, it  did not have sufficient time to spread out and  become the dominant strain in the 2004 flu season. From our observation, it usually  
108  takes about 8 months or longer for a new strain to become dominant after its appearance  in a  new cluster. Therefore,  the predominant flu strain in 2004 season is expected to be  A/Fujian/411/2002 based on the data as of February 1, 2004. This result agrees with  the dominant flu strain in the 2004 flu season.  5.2.9 Detecting A/California/4/2004 as a future dominant strain  As a  further example of applying the low-dimensional clustering method to influenza  in Southern hemisphere,  we test the method on the 2005 flu season. The H3N2 vac- cine  strain in the 2005 flu season in the Southern hemisphere was A/Wellington/1/2004.  Data from HI assay tests and surveillance suggest that the dominant H3N2 strain in  the 2005 season was A/California/7/2004. In HI tests with postinfection ferret sera  the majority of influenza A(H3N2) viruses from February 2005 to October 2005 were  closely related  to A/California/7/2004, as reported by WHO on October 7, 2005[144].  Surveillance  data from Victoria, Australia, show that 45% of influenza A infections  
.J)02 .J)~t5 ·GGt "'OM  0.02  (a) 
.  - 0.01  ~-:'~ ..  •  0.00 .... 1:. .. ~... : ~--=. •  I     -• .-:._  -0.01  001& 0.02  _ •• -.v-. ,  AIC:AfIfkJtnWlf'lOO4  -G.02  -0.01 0.00  0.01  0.02  (c)  0.015  0.010  0.005  0 .000 
.Q.OO5 
.Q.010  (b)  2003 Oct 1 ·2004 Feb 1 
... : AIWllllnglonftJ /2004 •• 
. . ..  -I •  7.",. · 
. -.  • •    I    •  -~ . 
. 
.Q.015+---~--.---~--.-~---.~---,-~-r-l  -G.02 .Q.01 0.00 0 .0 1 0.02 0.03  (d)  109  Figure 5.6  (a), Kernel density estimation for the protein distance map for H3N2 viruses  between 10/01/2003 and 09/30/2004. (b), Kernel density estimation for the protein distance  map for H3N2 viruses between 10/01/2003 and 02/01/2004. (c), Protein distance map for  H3N2 viruses between 10/01/2003 and 09/30/2004. We plot a dotted line to separate the two  clusters. (d),  Protein distance map for H3N2 viruses between 10/01/2003 and 02/01/2004. The  vertical and horizontal axes of all figures represent protein distance. A 0.0030 unit of protein  distance equals one mutation of the HAl protein  sequence of H3N2.  
110  were A/California/7/2004-like (H3), 11% were A/Wellington/1/2004 (H3) and 44% were  A/New Caledonia /20/99-like (H1), as collected in the 2005 flu season[121]. Surveillance  data from New Zealand also show that the dominant H3N2 strain in the 2005 flu season  was A/California/7/2004[5].  We plot the protein distance for the H3N2 viruses in the 2003-2004 flu season in Fig.  5.6(c).  We only use the data as of September 30, 2004, earlier than the October 2004  date when the WHO published the influenza vaccine recommendation for Southern hemi- sphere. We plot  the kernel density estimation in Fig. 5.6(a) for the data in Fig. 5.6(c).  There are three major clusters in Fig. 5.6(a).  The one on the left is the current domi- nant cluster which are mostly A/Fujian/422/2002-like viruses. There is a  middle cluster  centered on A/Wellington/1/2004.  The one on the right contains A/California/7/2004.  Both the A/California/7/2004 cluster and the A/Wellington/1/2004 cluster are antigeni- cally novel from A/Fujian/411/2002.  When the protein distance map and kernel estimation as of February 1, 2004, is plotted  
111  in Fig. 5.6(d) and (b), we still see the A/Wellington/l/2004 cluster. With these data, the  A/California/7/2004 cluster is no longer observed. Thus, A/California/7/2004 cluster is  a  newly appearing cluster  and we consider it to be the emerging strain. The new clus- ter which contains A/California/7/2004 is separate from the current dominant cluster.  We calculated  the average Pepitope of the new cluster that contains A/California/7/2004  with regard  to A/Fujian/411/2002 to be 0.112. This makes the new cluster fulfill both  criteria for an incipient dominant strain cluster. So we predict based on the information  as of September 30, 2004,  that A/California/7/2004 will be the next dominant strain  after  A/Fujian/411/2002 in Southern hemisphere. We further predict from these data  that A/California/7/2004 will be the dominant strain in the following flu season in the  Northern hemisphere. These predictions agree with the observed dominant strain in the  2005 flu season.  
112  5.3 Discussion  The evolution of influenza virus is driven by cell receptor distributions, non-specific  innate host defense mechanisms, cross immunity[54,  47], and other contributions to viral  fitness.  In this paper, we focused on HA protein evolution under antibody selection  pressure.  The degree to which the immunity induced by one strain protects against  another  strain depends on their antigenic distance[55]. Because the human immune  response  to viral infection is not completely cross protective, natural selection favors  amino-acid variants of  the HA protein that allow the virus to evade immunity, infect more  hosts,  and proliferate. Mutant strains surround the dominant strain and group into a  cluster  rather than evolve in a defined direction[llO, 94]. After the virus has circulated in  population for one or more years, effective vaccines and cross immunity of  the population  drive  the evolution of influenza by mutation and reassortment. This evolution increases  the immune-escape component of the fitness of new strains, and eventually causes a  new  
113  epidemic. These new immune-escape strains will form a  new cluster, and the old clusters  will die out,  thus starting a  new cycle. This process of creating of new clusters is what  our method detects.  The low dimensional clustering can be used not only in genetic sequences but also  on distances calculated from inhibition assays of antibody and antigens, as first shown  by Lapedes  and Farber[79] and Smith et al.[UO]. The inhibition assay provides an ap- proximation of antigenic distance  and is broadly used as a  marker for vaccine efficacy.  The inhibition assay suffers from low resolution of data, which multidimensional scaling  improves,  and is less able to predict the vaccine efficacy than the Pepitope method[55].  The genetic sequences used here are a  direct description of the evolution of pathogen and  antigenic distance of influenza. To aid vaccine selection,  the low dimensional clustering  on genetic sequences appears informative.  Challenges may arise in application of  the method described here. If two or more new  clusters appear in one season, additional information is needed  to decide which cluster  
114  should be chosen for vaccine. Fortunately, it has been shown that the evolution of  influenza is  typically in one direction[47, 110].  It is  rare to have two or more new clusters  in the protein distance map in one season. As experience with the low dimensional  sequence clustering is gained,  it may be that cluster structure will allow more precise  prediction of vaccine efficacy. Despite these issues,  the method described here can assist  the design of vaccines, and it provides a  new tool to analyze influenza viral dynamics.  We did  not see any false positive results in Table 5.1.  The current WHO method works quite well in many years. The method discussed  here  appears to offer an additional tool which may provide additional utility.  5.4 Materials and Methods  5.4.1 Data sources  Influenza hemagglutinin A(H3N2) sequences before October 1, 2008, and A(H1N1) se- quences as of December 5,2009, were downloaded from NCBI Influenza Virus Resources[14].  All hemagglutinin sequences used in our  study are filtered by removing identical se- 
115  quences. Thus, all groups of identical sequences in the dataset are be represented by  the oldest sequence in each group. This approach reduces the number of sequences by  keeping only  the unique sequences in the dataset. Influenza A(H3N2) sequences after  October  1, 2008, were downloaded from GISAID database.  5.4.2 Geographical spread pattern of 2009 A(H1N1)  It is  believe that the 2009 A(HINl) virus was most likely originated from Mexico[49J.  It first spread  to the neighboring country USA and then to other countries. We display  this geographical spread pattern in Fig.5.!. We take the founder-Fl relationship from  Fig. 5.1, and assume the virus spreads from location of founder to the location of F!.  We consider three regions: USA, Mexico and other countries except USA and Mexico.  Then we count the cases of spreading from one region to another region. In Table 5.2, we  show that we observed many more paths of spreading from the USA to other countries  than from other countries to the USA. The major path of spreading is  from USA to other  
116  Spreading path  Number of cases  USA  to Others  32  Others to USA  1  Mexico to Others  1  Others to Mexico  0  Others to others  6  Table 5.2 The geographical spread pattern of 2009 A(HINl). "Others" refers to other  countries except  USA and Mexico.  countries. This result indicates our directional evolutionary map of Fig. 5.1 is in good  agreement  with the pattern of geographical spread.  5.4.3 Multidimensional scaling  The goal of multidimensional scaling is to represent the distance of proteins by a  Euclidean distance in coordinate space.  We calculate the distance between proteins i  and j, d ij , by the number of amino acid residue differences divided by the total number  of amino acid residues, as defined by Equation 5.1. To do multidimensional scaling,  we  start with the distance of the proteins. The object of multidimensional scaling is to find  the two, or p in general, directions that best preserve the distances d ij  between the N  
117  proteins  N  F = L(d ij  -Dij)2 (5.2)  i,j=l  Here, Dij = IIxi -Xj II is the Euclidean distance between proteins i and j in the projected  space, and  II-II is  the vector norm. The algorithm is as follows. Let the matrix A = [(aij)],  where aij = -~4j' The eigenvalues of A are 1'1,1'2, ... , I'N and 1'1 ~ 1'2 ~ ... ~ I'N.  Let Vel)  (  (1) (1) (1))  b h . f d (2) _ ((2) (2) (2))  VI ,V 2  , 
... , VN e  t   e eIgenvector 0 ,1 an V -VI ,V 2  , 
... , VN be  the eigenvector of 1'2' Let x -vIYlV(I) and y -~V(2). The two coordinates in  protein distance maps are x and  y. The x-axis in the protein distance map is  the largest  eigenvector.  We take H3N2 2008-2009 season as an example. In Fig. 5.5(c), we observe  two clusters. One cluster is  on  the right side of figures with x value positive and another  one has negative  x values. We define the consensus sequence of a  group of flu strains  by taking  the most frequent amino acid at each position. We calculate the consensus  sequences  both for the strains in the cluster on the right and on the left of figure. We found  
118  000 _  o Cl)O O~O  II)OCIDOCC co ~  00 .,~O~O  QllJ2 QllJ3 QIID4 IIIID5 IlI!Il6  Figure 5.7 Plot of Euclidean distances of proteins as in Fig. 5.4(d) on x-axis and plot of  distance of corresponding proteins in y-axis. Closeness to the diagonal measures fidelity of the  low dimensional projection. A 0.0030 unit of protein distance equals one mutation of the HAl  protein sequence of H3N2.  amino acids at four positions (76, 160, 172, 203) are different for these two consensus  H3N2 strains, see Table 5.3. Interestingly, the Shannon entropy calculated from all 2008- 2009  season sequences at these four positions (0.43, 0.67, 0.59, 0.50) are the largest, which  means  the diversity at these four position are the largest.  There is software available to run the multidimensional scaling. We use the Matlab  function "CMDSCALE" to generate an N x p configuration matrix Y. Rows of Yare the  coordinates of N points in p-dimensional space. The "CMDSCALE" also returns a vector  
Position in HAl protein of H3N2 76  Amino acid in consensus strain 1 Glu  Amino acid in consensus strain 2 Lys  Shannon Entropy 0.43  160 172  Asn Lys  Lys Asn  0.67 0.59  203  Asn  Lys  0.50  119  Table 5.3 Consensus strain 1 is the calculated from all strains in the cluster on the right  side of Figure 5.5(c). Consensus  strain 2 is the calculated from all strains in the cluster on the  left side of Figure 5.5(c).  E containing the sorted eigenvalues of what is often referred to as the "scalar product  matrix," which, in the simplest case, is equal to yyT. If only two or three of the largest  eigenvalues E are much larger than others, then the matrix D based on the corresponding  columns of Y nearly reproduces  the original distance matrix d. We used the influenza  H3N2  in 2001-2002 season as an example. The five largest of all 180 eigenvalues are  0.0361,  0.0032,  0.0024, 0.0020,  0.0016.  The first  two largest eigenvalues contribute 70%  to the sum of all 180 eigenvalues, which indicates p = 2. Then, we plot the the N points  in a  two-dimensional graph. Each  point represents a  protein. The Euclidean distance  between  any two points Dij on the graph should be equal to or close to the distance of  
120  these two proteins. that is, Dij :::::: d ij
. As an example, in Fig. 5.7, we show that Dij and  d ij  have a  strong linear relationship. A short MAT LAB program of multidimensional  scaling is as follow.  % Multidimensional scaling.  % alignment.aln is a sequence multialignment file  % generated by software ClustalW.  clear  Sequences = multialignread('alignment.aln');  distances = seqpdist(Sequences,'Method','p-distance')j  Y = cmdscale(distances)j  scatter(Y(:,l), Y(:,2))j  
121  5.4.4 Biases in the data  There are two biases in the sequence data. First, more isolates are sequenced in recent  years. Generally speaking, more sequences make  the vaccine selection based on low- dimensional clustering  methods more reliable. That is  why we compared low-dimensional  clustering  methods with WHO results only since 1996 in Table 5.1. To avoid these biases  in the generation of the figure of evolution history of influenza for the 40 years (Fig. 5.3),  we choose 20 random isolates for each season, even though the database contains more  sequences  in recent years. Second, most isolates are collected in USA. We found that  many isolates collected in USA are identical, because of the high sampling rate in USA.  To reduce this bias,  we collapse redundant strains, keeping only distinct strains.  
Part III  Bacterial and animal immune  systems  122  
Chapter 6  Heterogeneous Diversity of Spacers within CRISPR  6.1 Introduction  Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) has been re- cently suggested  to provide adaptable immunity to bacteria and archaea[18, 22, 35]. A  typical  CRISPR system is composed of CRISPR-associated( cas) genes and a  CRISPR- cassette[73,  20, 95]. A CRISPR-cassette is formed by nearly identical direct repeats of  24-47  bp long nucleotides separated by similar sized, unique spacers. Repeats usually  show some dyad symmetry  but are not truly palindromic, implying the presence of a  conserved secondary structure. Arrays of the same  CRISPR are commonly followed by  a  conserved AT-rich sequence known as the leader.  The leader appears to promote tran- script ions towards the repeats, generating the RNAs  that constitute the molecular base  of  the interference action. Recent studies have proposed that CRISPRs and cas genes  function in anti-viral defense. A considerable fraction of spacer sequences are found  to  
124  be similar to known phage sequences, indicating that the spacer sequences may derive  from viruses  and phages[20]. Moreover, when bacteria that possess the CRISPR-Cas sys- tern are exposed  to viruses, the surviving individuals appear to have new virus-derived  sequences  at the leader-proximal end of CRISPR 10ci[18, 35]. Further, the acquisition  or loss of  CRISPR elements or  of Cas protein genes has been directly correlated with  phage  and plasmid resistance or sensitivity, respectively[18, 35, 22]. The CRISPR system  has began to attract a  large amount of attention due to its potential role in restricting  horizontal gene transfer. Because  CRISPR system interference targets external DNA  directly,  it may prevent conjugation and plasmid transformation[82]. CRISPR system  can also be used in anti-phage bacteria selection[70j.  Recent experiments  demonstrated the heterogeneous distribution of diversity of the  spacers in the CRISPR system[122, 11]. However, the mechanism by which the phage- bacteria interaction shapes the spacer structure is poorly understood. In this paper, we  propose a  model that describes how the newly added spacers are more diversified and the  
125  old spacers are more conserved due to selective pressure on the CRISPR system. This  model explains the underlying mechanism that shapes the spacer structure. This model  confirmed  that the diversity of CRISPR spacers is essential for the survive of bacteria.  6.2 Results  We describe the CRISPR-phage dynamics in the schematic representation of Fig. 6.1.  In this figure, spacers are shown in numbers, and repeats are shown in dark squares.  Leader sequences are directly adjacent  to the short spacer-repeat units and possibly in- volved  in promoting transcription towards the repeats. The virus DNA that is  recognized  by  CRISPR is represented by the letter "i." Only the CRISPR of the bacterial genome  are shown;  other parts of genome are assume to be identical in all bacteria strains. When  bacteria are exposed to phage viruses, there are three possible scenarios: bacteria are in- fected, viruses are defended, or  bacteria acquire new spacers. In Fig. 6.1, the bacteria  incorporate a  piece of the phage DNA represented by the letter 'i' into its own genome  
126  as a  new spacer. New spacers are always added to the leader-proximal end[70]. To  avoid infinite growth of  CRISPR, an old spacer is dropped when CRISPR in excess of  certain length[122]. The CRISPR system provides an immune response. After insertion  of  exogenous DNA from phages or plasmids,  the CRISPR spacers are transcribed and  processed to CRISPR RNA units. The CRISPR RNA units serve as templates to recog- nize foreign nucleotide acids.  If any of the CRISPR RNA units match the phage-derived  sequences,  the phage genetic material is  degraded by bacteria. If none of CRISPR RNA  units matches the phage-derived sequences, the bacteria are likely to be infected by the  phage, and the phages will reproduce. When bacteria divide, the CRISPR are copied to  the daughter cells[75].  6.2.1 Differential equation model  We use a population dynamics model to describe the bacteria-virus community. We  assume only one CRISPR locus for each bacteria individual. We first consider a  simple  
+  CRISPR in Bacteria Virus  Virus killed  Bacteria infected,  Virus reproduces  CRISPR with a new  spacer  Figure 6.1 A schematic representation to describe CRISPR-phage dynamics.  127  case in which there are no more than two spacers for each CRISPR locus. By the first  spacer,  we mean the spacer that is  nearest t o the leader sequences. The second spacer  is  the spacer that is t he  next nearest to the leader sequences.  We consider the following  system of ordinary differential equations:  dx" " L L  ---'!:2l... = ex" " -{3 Vk x" " + {3'"V x " V "  dt t ,J t,J I J,m t  (6.1)  k:/=i,j m  dVk L  -= rVk -(3 x " "Vk(O" k + O"k)  dt t ,J t , J,  (6.2)  i ,j  
128  There are two variables in the above equations: Vk is the population of virus strain k,  and Xi,j is the population of bacteria with CRISPR with spacers i and j. The first spacer  recognizes virus  strain i and the second spacer recognizes virus strain j. In the absence  of phage infection,  the bacterial growth is  exponential at rate c. The term f3 'L..kfi,j VkXi,j  represents the bacteria with spacers of type i and j infected by viruses strains other  than i or j. Bacteria can be infected or killed when they are exposed to viruses that  bacteria do not recognize by CRISPR. The exposure rate of bacteria to virus is f3. The  term f3'Y 'L..m Xj,mVi represents the process of the converting other types of bacteria into  bacteria of type i,j. When bacteria of type j, m incorporate virus of strain i into their  own genome  and add a  new spacer, bacteria type j, m are converted to type i, j. The  probability of adding a  new spacer when a bacteria is exposed to a  virus is 'Y. In the  absence of resistance from CRISPR, viral growth is exponential at rate r. The term  f3 'L..i,j Xi,jVk(Oi,k + OJ,k) represents the degradation of viruses by bacteria. If any spacers  of  bacteria of type i, j match viruses of strain k, the bacteria degrade the viruses. The  
129  Kronecker delta function 8 i ,k is 1  if  spacer type i matches virus strain k; otherwise, it  is  O. This model is modified from the classic immune response model with antigenic  variation[89].  In this model, we take only the essential factors into consideration. We do  not distinguish  the lysis and lysogeny cycle. Horizontal gene transfer is not considered.  Furthermore, because viruses usually have more  than one type of host to infect, viral  growth is not limited by one specific type of target bacteria abundance[89,  11].  Solution of the model shows that the diversity of old spacer decreases upon challenge  by viruses. We solve  the differential equations by Matlab software using Runge-Kutta  method.  The initial value for the differential equations are naive bacteria whose CRISPR  provide no resistance to viruses because their spacers are empty. The population of bacte:- ria drops fast  at the beginning. Some bacteria acquire spacers from viruses and therefore  develop resistance.  The population of bacteria is steadily recovered. We measure the  
diversity of spacers by the Shannon entropy:  j  j  D2 = -I)L:: Pi,j) In(L:: Pi,j)  j  D, ,   _ Xi,j 
.r~,J -'"'  L....m,nXm,n  130  (6.3)  (6.4)  (6.5)  Here, Dl and D2 are the diversity for the first and second spacers. Because new spacers  are always added  to the leader-proximal end, the first spacer is "younger" than the  second spacer. If there is no selective pressure on CRISPR, or CRISPR do not provide  resistance against viruses,  the diversity of spacers along CRISPR should be homogeneous,  Dl = D 2 , because adding and deleting spacers is  completely random. With the selective  pressure on  CRISPR to evolve resistance to phage, we observe a  decline of diversity of  the second spacer, as shown in Fig. 6.2. In this figure, the differential equation solution  and simulation are based on the parameter values c  0.15, (3 2 X 10- 6 ,  'Y = 0.1,  and r = 0.01. The viruses have four strains (length of string n = 2) with an initial  
131  population ratio 6:2:1:1. The maximal population size allowed is 10 6  for virus and 10 5  for bacteria. Diversity is measured by Shannon entropy. Other measures of diversity  such as Simpson's index of diversity give similar results.  Error bars are one standard  error. The insert figure is  solutions of differential equations with 200 different parameter  combinations using LHS. The up branches are the first spacer, and the down branches  are  the second spacers. At the beginning, both positions have high diversity of spacers.  With the continuous challenge of viruses and selective pressure for the effective resistance  against viruses,  the diversity of spacers at the second position decreases with time. When  steady state is reached after some time, we observe that the diversity of spacers at the  second position is  lower than that at the first spacer. Our observation is true for a  broad  choice of parameters.  Parameter space was explored by using the statistical technique  of  Latin hypercube sampling (LHS). LHS selects combinations of parameter values from  parameter value range and probability distribution function. The parameter ranges we  used are: c E (0.01, 0.15), (3 E (10- 5 ,2 x 10- 5 ), ')' E (0.01, 0.1), r E (0.01, 0.1). We used  
132  ,  • ..  •  •  1.2  ~  c..  >- 0.1  0  e  c  ~  ,  W 
..... ....  ,  cO.  c  ! 
....  ,  0  c  Q)  '!"  c  ~  C  ,  ,  m 0.4  0  ,  ,  0.9  ,  ,  10 Time 20  30  C  i',  c  ,  ,  «j  1""'" 
.r::.  --Differential eq., 1 st spacer  C/)  - - - -Differential eq., 2nd spacer  •  Simulation, 1 st spacer  4  --- ------.  •  •  Simulation, 2nd spacer  0.6  0  10 20  30  Time  Figure 6.2 Diversity of two spacers of CRISPR with time.  200  samplings to sample parameter space.   In the insert of Fig.  6 .2, we observe that  diversity of the old spacer is decreasing and the diversity of the young spacer is almost  constant over time for all samplings.  Selection  for bacteria  that contain t he  most effective spacers  d ecreases the diversity  
133  of the old spacer. The bacteria randomly take virus genomes from the environment and  incorporate a corresponding spacer. Therefore, the diversity of the first spacer approaches  the diversity of viruses in the environment. If the spacers match the dominant virus  strain, bacteria containing these spacers are more likely to survive, and therefore spacers  that match dominant viruses accumulate in the CRISPR. Bacteria that contain unused  spacer elements  that provide little protective potency are more likely to be infected  by phage.  The spacers corresponding to the dominant virus strain are enhanced and  accumulate at the second spacer position. Therefore, the diversity of the second spacers  decreases.  6.2.2 Stochastic simulation model  We seek to identify finite size effects by stochastic simulation. We use a  stochastic  individual-based model (IBM) for  the large bacteria and virus population by Lebowitz- Gillespie algorithm.  Each bacteria and each virus is an agent. Viruses are represented  
134  as bit-strings. Each bit has two alleles, designated as a "1" or "0". In individual-based  model,  the length of virus strings are n, therefore 2 n  genotypes are available for viruses.  For bacteria,  we ignore other parts of genome, but consider CRISPR locus only. Each  spacer is  n bit 10ng[75], which is the same size as viruses. The simulation starts with  a  population of viruses of different genotypes and bacteria without spacers in  CRISPR  locus. Viruses infect bacteria with a contact rate f3. If any spacer of bacteria matches the  infecting virus, the virus is killed. Otherwise, the bacteria is infected and die. Bacteria  and viruses reproduce at rate c and r respectively. Bacteria add a new spacer with a rate  'Y from contacting virus. In Fig. 6.2, we adopt the same parameters as used in differential  equations. We observed  the simulation results agree with the analytic results.  We further extend our individual-based simulation  to allow the CRISPR to have  more spacers, random loss of spacers and mutation. Most  CRISPR contain fewer than  50 repeat-spacer units. For example, the average number of spacers of Streptococcus  thermophilus  is 23 per CRISPR locus in one study[71J. In our extended simulation,  
135  when the array of spacers of bacteria is  more than 30, a spacer is  randomly deleted with  probability proportional  to its distance to the leader sequence. When viruses replicate,  the mutation rate of each strain is c. We perform mutation by randomly flipping one bit  of viruses bit-string from "I"  to "0" or from "0" to "1". The extended simulation starts  with a  population of 150 virus genotypes and bacteria without spacers. The simulation  runs until  it reaches steady state. We run the simulation 100 times to average the  results. After the simulation reaches steady state, we calculate the diversity of spacers  for each position by Shannon entropy. In Fig. 6.3,  the positions with a  small number in  the x-axis are leader-proximal. In this extended simulation, we use the parameters: c =  0.15, (3 = x10- 5 ,  'Y = 0.1, r = 0.05, mutation rate c = 0.01, size of virus bit-string n = 10.  Initially, there are 150 phage strains with a logarithm population distribution[122]. Other  parameter settings give similar results. Error bars are one  standard error. In Fig. 6.3,  we observe that the "young" spacers which are leader-proximal are highly diversified and  that the "old" spacers which are leader-distal are more conserved.  
~  a.  e 
....  c  4  w 2  c  o  c  c  co 
..c  en  o  !!Ht!I  ,  o  It I  It  ,  10  IT!  H!!!umUn  ,  20  Position  ,  30  136  - Figure 6.3 Diversity of spacers at different positions of CRISPR, when the system reaches  steady state.  
137  These results support the following scenario: Infection by a  novel viral genotype re- sults in  the lysis or weakening of most individuals, except those that are able to capture  and incorporate a  corresponding spacer into their CRISPR locus. Resistant individuals  rapidly gain a selective advantage, leading  to the fixation of the resistant spacer. Increas- ing polymorphism toward  the leader-proximal end provides support that the CI~ISPR  are an actively evolving and functioning phage defense mechanism.  6.2.3 Experimental results  This model is in agreement with recent experiment results. Horvath et al. [71 J se- quenced  the CRISPR regions of 124 S. thermophilus strains and analyzed 3626 spacers,  926  of which are unique. We aligned the spacers of CRISPR loci 1 for 124 strains. Shan- non entropy was calculated for each aligned position, see Fig. 6.4. Spacers  at leader- proximal positions are more diverse  and spacers at leader-distal positions are highly con- served across strains. For example,  at the most leader-distal position, 34 of 124 strains  
138  3.5  3.0  ~  a.  e  2.5 
.....  c::  (J)  2.0  c::  0  1.5  c::  c::  CO  1.0 
..c:  en  0.5  0.0  0 10 20 30 40  Position of spacers  Figure 6.4 Diversity of spacers of CRlSPR loci 1 of S. thermophilus strains[71]. The  positions with a small number  in the x-axis are leader-proximal.  share  the identical spacer.  Recent metagenomic studies of environmental microbial samples provide a population- wide view of  the dynamics between phage and CRISPR of the hosts[122, 11,66]. In one  study, sequence  data were assembled from biofilm community samples[122, 11]. The  CRISPR loci of the predominant Leptospirillum species display extensive polymorphism.  
139  •  ••  0.6  •  •  • •  ~  •  •  • • •  a.  •  •  •  e  ••  • 
...  •  •  r::::  •  •  (I,)  0.4- r::::  •  •  0  ••  r::::  •  •  --.  "  r::::  •  CO  -C  0.2 
...  •   •  - en  •  •  •  •  • •  I  0 20 40 60  Position  Figure 6.5 Diversity of spacers of CRISPR loci of Leptospirillum species. The data are  noisy because  the CRISPR loci sequence data of Leptospirillum are fragmented.  
140  We calculate the Shannon entropy for each position of CRISPR, see Fig. 6.5. The bacteria  community shared spacer sequences  at the leader-distal end of their CRISPR loci, while  the leader-proximal end of the loci contained spacers that were mostly unique to each  individuals.  The decrease of diversity of spacers from leader-proximal end to leader- distal end supports a  model in which highly plastic  CRISPR loci continuously respond  to challenge from a  rapidly evolving pool of phage.  6.3 Conclusion  To sum up, the CRISPR provide adaptable immunity to bacteria and archaea. Bac- teria continuously incorporate nucleotide material from phage genomes into CRISPR to  gain resistance against phage infection. Viruses continuously perform nucleotide muta- tion and horizontal gene transfer  to avoid being recognized. The coevolution interaction  between viruses and bacteria CRISPR system has shaped  the spacer structure of CRISPR  locus. Both our model and recent experiments support the declining diversity of spacers  
141  towards leader-distal end, implying that the CRISPR is an actively anti-viral system.  Our model explored that the underlying mechanism of shaping spacer structure is the  selection of bacteria  CRISPR systems that match best with viruses in the environment,  and the diversity of bacteria CRISPR is  vital for survive. Further effort can extend our  model  to study the population dynamics of phage under the pressure of CRISPR.  
Chapter 7  Regulated mechanism in antibody VDJ  recombination  7 .1 Introduction  The adaptive immune system is one of the most well characterized, yet complex  biochemical systems in  the animal body, but we still have much to learn about its design  and how it functions [72]. One question is how the diversity of antibody repertoire is  created. The diversity of the antibody repertoire is achieved by both combinatorial and  junctional diversity, followed by somatic mutation.  The large diversity of the antibody  repertoire allows  the immune system to recognize a  wide variety of antigens. In each B  cell precursor, one each of  the many V, D, and J gene segments recombine to form a  heavy chain.  This process is  called VDJ recombination. The B cell precursor becomes a  mature naive B cell after negative selection and is released to the blood from the bone  marrow.  When the mature naive B cell binds to foreign antigen, it is  activated and gives  
143  rise to plasma cells and memory cells. Therefore, the B cell antibody repertoire is mainly  composed of two types of antibodies:  the naive B cells that are not activated by antigen  are called  the naive antibody repertoire, and the plasma and memory B cells that have  been under clonal selection are called activated  antibody repertoire.  It is commonly believed that a  heavy chain is generated by randomly combining  V, D  and J gene segments [72]. However, some studies have shown that V, D, and J  genes may be not used equally in the pre-immune repertoire and that individual V gene  segments rearrange  at different frequencies [45, 155,93]. One explanation for the unequal  frequency of V segments  is the natural variation in recombination signal sequences that  are recognized by recombinase enzymes [46]. Previous work focuses on the individual  gene segment usage, correlations of  VDJ combinatorial usages between individuals have  only recently been studied.  In this study, strong correlations in  the zebrafish naive antibody repertoires are ob- served.  The entire expressed VDJ repertoires from 14 zebrafish are used [130]. Previous  
144  study found limited correlations between fish antibody repertoires[130]. By classifying  the whole antibody repertoire into naive antibody repertoire and activated antibody  repertoire,  we show that the naive antibody repertoire has a  strong correlation, and the  activated antibody repertoires has almost no correlation. We further propose a  stochas- tic model of  VDJ recombination in which each V, D and J  segment are chosen at some  frequency, which  is conserved across individuals. Our results suggest that the VDJ re- combination process  is regulated.  7.2 Results  7.2.1 Correlation in the naive VDJ repertoire  In zebrafish, there are 39 choices for the V segment, 5  for D and 5  for J, for a  total  of 975 possible  VDJ combinations. Previous experiments have produced the complete  antibody repertoire in each of  14 zebrafish [130]. The V, D and J segments of all the  sequences are recognized by aligning the genomes. In this study, T[Jk is used to donate  the sequence reads of VDJ combinations(type i V segement, type j D segment, and type  
145  k J  segment) of fish n. The naive antibody VDJ repertoire can be constructed from the  entire antibody VDJ repertoire by removing the highly represented VDJ combinations.  The inactive naive B cells have low copies. Once they are activated by antigen, they start  to duplicate themselves and can increase in number by up to 1000 fold [72]. Considering  that each B cell bears a  single type of receptor with a  unique VDJ combination, the  highly expressed VDJ combinations in repertoire are very likely from the activated B  cells.  Strong correlation between zebrafish antibody repertoire is observed when highly  represented  VDJ combinations are removed. T[jk is ranked by their value and the top p  percentage of VDJ combinations that have the most sequence reads are removed from  the 975 possible VDJ combinations. The remaining VDJ repertoire has 975 * (1-p) VDJ  combinations and is  a  vector in which each element TrJk records the number of reads that  map to a particular VDJ combination. The Pearson correlation coefficient is calculated  between  the remaining VDJ repertoire vectors from different fish. The control experi- 
a 0.6  - J!  CD  § 0.4  CD  CD  j 0.2  0.0 --.-. .. -. .--. ---.  012  Percentage of removal (%)  (a)  3  146 
.f  as  Q.  '0  0.1  c:  0  - 0  e  u.  o.  0.0 0.4 0.8  Correlation coefficient  (b)  Figure 7.1  VDJ repertoire correlation analysis for all 14 fish. (a) Correlation of VDJ  repertoire with highly expressed VDJ combinations removed. (b) Histogram of correlation  of VDJ repertoire with the top 2% of most expressed VDJ combinations removed. In both  figures, the simulation is conducted by randomly swapping the sequence reads between VDJ  combinations.  
147  ments are also constructed by randomizing the VDJ repertoire vectors. Fish were nearly  uncorrelated in all  VDJ repertoires when all VDJ combinations are considered in Figure  7.1{a).  The correlation increases when the more highly expressed VDJ combinations are  removed, saturating  at maximal value of 0.52. The activated VDJ combinations are es- timated to account for 1 % ~ 2% of entire 975 possible VDJ combinations. The sequence  reads are added up for  the top 2% mostly expressed VDJ combinations and find that the  activated  VDJ combinations account for 57% of all sequences reads. The activated VDJ  combinations has a small diversity and a large amount of volume in  the entire repertoire.  Note  that in the human repertoire, memory B cells have at a  roughly 100 times higher  copy number and a  roughly 100 times lower diversity, compared with naive B  cells. The  results here suggest the same number may hold for zebrafish.  The correlation between fish is calcuated by removing the  top 2% of VDJ combina- tions.  The correlations are significantly larger than that for simulated control experiment.  The correlations in the naive VDJ repertoire are unexpectedly high, which indicates the  
0.6  ~ 
.~ 0.4  '0  c:  o  :;;  o 0.2  e  u.  0.0 0.4  0.8  Correlation coefficient  Figure 7.2 Naive and activated VDJ repertoire correlation analysis for all 14 fish.  148  
0.5  0.45  0.4  0.35  0.3  0  .25  0  . 2  0 .15  0.1  0.05  149  Figure 7.3  Correlation matrix of the activated VDJ repertoire. Only fish 4 and 6, fish 12  and 13 have strong correlations.  
150  VDJ recombination is a  regulated process. These results are in contrast with the com- mon view  that the VDJ repertoire is  generated by a series of uniformly random molecular  events within independent B cells  [72J.  Another method to distinguish naive antibody repertoire from activated repertoire  is based on somatic hypermutation. When a  B cell is activated by  an antigen, it is  stimulated to divide (or proliferate). During proliferation, the B cell receptor locus  undergoes  an extremely high rate of somatic mutation that is at least 10 5  - 10 6  fold  greater  than the normal rate of mutation across the genome[90J. For each sequence  read in ref.[130]'  we compare it with standard V, D, and J  gene segments to find non- junctional mutations  that are considered as somatic hypermutations. Sequence reads are  grouped into a cluster if their sequences are identical.  If a sequence cluster has no somatic  hypermutation and there are fewer  than 5  sequence reads in the cluster, this cluster is  considered as naive antibody cluster. we impose a cutoff of 5 sequence reads in the cluster,  so  that activated B cells without somatic hypermuations are excluded. If sequence cluster  
151  has somatic hypermutations and there are more than one sequence reads in cluster, this  cluster  is considered as naive antibody cluster. we impose a  cutoff of greater than one  sequence reads  to exclude the sequencing errors from somatic hypermuations. The naive  VDJ repertoire Tgk(N) is calculated using sequence reads in naive antibody clusters. The  activated VDJ repertoire 77jk(A) is calculated using sequence reads in activated antibody  clusters. Further, correlation coefficients are calculated  Cm,n(N) =< (Tm(N), Tn(N) >  Strong correlations in the naive VDJ repertoires are observed in Figure 7.2. This is  in agreement with Figure 7.1(b). Small correlations exist in activated  VDJ repertoires.  The activated antibody repertoire is developed under clonal selection that is correlated  with the environment. Therefore the small correlations in activated VDJ repertoires can  be explained that different fish see different environment and therefore their immune  responses have different history  [72]. Although most fish were uncorrelated in their  activated  VDJ repertoires, two pairs of fish are highly correlated in Figure 7.3. Detail  
152  examination of these two pairs of fish reveals that they are from the same family. It is  possible  that these two pairs of fish are living in the same environment and have a  similar  disease history,  and so they developed a  similar antibody repertoire.  7.2.2 Regulated model of VDJ recombination  One question naturally arises is how the zebrafish immune system explores the large  space  of all possible VDJ combinations to find the tiny 1% rv 2% effective VDJ combina- tions  to defect antigens, see Figure 7.1. A random search in the entire space seems costly  and inefficiently. When an antigen invades, does the immune system have pre-designed  pathes to search for VDJ combinations with the best affinity binding the antigen?  Here, we propose a  statistical model to describe the mechanism of VDJ recombination  and how the immune systems explore the large space of the antibody repertoire. We  assume  the frequency probability of a particular VDJ combination is the product of the  
153  frequency probability of its V, D and J segments.  (7.1)  Here, P[Jk is the frequency of observing the VDJ combination of type "ijk" in fish n.  Pt(V), PP(D) and Pf:(J) are the probability of selecting i type V, j type D and k type  J  during  VDJ recombination in fish n, respectively. The value of Pt(V), PP(D) and  Pf:( J) are estimated by fitting the model to the naive VDJ repertoire data by maximal  likelihood Monte Carlo method.  The initial value of probability of gene segments is  The value of Pt(V), PP(D) and Pf:(J) is perturbed to maximize the correlation between  model prediction  and real data as defined as Dn =< PtJk' T0k(N) >  The model is calibrated with the zebrafish data. The model can produce the naive  VDJ repertoire similar the original data with high fidelity. The model estimation fits  well with the original data with high correlation in Figure 7.4(a). By directly comparing  
c  i 0.8  c 0.6  o  :;  ~  8 0.4  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  1011121314  Fish  (a)  ",!II.  a.  c  0  :;::l  III  E  ~  CD  Gi  "8  :::i:  154  10.
2  10-3  10-4  10-6  10-6 10-4 10-3 10.
2  Observed data T:.(N)  (b)  Figure 7.4 (a) Correlation D n  between naive VDJ repertoire TI)k(N) and model estimation  PDk' (b) Fitting quality as illustrated by fish 5.  the model estimation and observed data in Figure 7.4(b), the simple model predicts the  data. From these results, the diversity of naive VDJ repertoire is likely generated by  choosing  V, D and J segments with some probability to create a VDJ combination.  We find  that the probability of choosing a particular V segment is the same across  fish.  In other words, all fish share the same probability distribution of V segments. The  Pin(v) with n = 1,2 ... ,14, and i = 1,2, ... ,39 is  shown in Figure 7.5. Heterogenous usage  of V segments are observed. Approximately half of V segments are heavily used  and the  
Model estimation  0.5 t=-==--------- 0 .4 --------- --lJl----_____ _  $" 0 .3  Ci"" 0.2  0 .1  o 
.".----- 1 2 3   4 5   6   7 8  9  101112131415161718192021 2223 24 25 26 27 28 29 30313233343536 3738 39  V segment  •  Fish 1  •   Fish 2  •   Fish 3  •  Fish 4  •  Fish 5  •  Fish 6  •  Fish 7  •  Fish 8  iii Fish 9  IiII Fish 10  Fish 11  Fish 12 
.t Fish 13 
...J Fish 14  Figure 7. 5 Pt(V) as estimated from the model for all 39 V segments in 14 fish.  155  other half are infrequently observed. One interesting question is whether the heavily used  V segments in one fish are also heavily used in  other fish. Intuitively, this trend can be  observed in Figure 7.5. For examplc, V segments of  type 11,  13, 20, and 21 are the most  frequently used segments in all fish. We determine  that the probability distribution V  segments is conserved across fish with a  significant average correlation of  p n(v) across  fish  (R2 = 0.57). The average of Pt(V) over 14 fish is shown in Figure 7.6.  Thc conserved probability frequency are also observed in J segments. The p!:( J)  
- G- a..  0.15  •  1-.-Averagel  •  0.10  •  0.05  •  • \./.\ / \  •  / l\ /\ •••  ~ ~ .. \.j V\,t  0.00 ~~~~~.~_.~.~.~~~~~~~~~  o 5 10    15 20 25 30 35 40  V segment  Figure 7.6 Average Pi(V) over 14 fish.  156  
0.4  ~ 
...., 
...........  a. 0.2  0.0  1  2 3 4  J segment  5  _Fish 1  ---.-Fish 2  ---A-Fish 3  ----T-Fish 4  -+-Fish 5  ~Fish6  -+-Fish 7  --+-Fish 8  -+-Fish 9  --*-Fish 10  ~Fish 11  _Fish 12  ---.-Fish 13  ---A-Fish 14  6  157  Figure 7.7 P!:(J) as estimated from the model for all 5 J  segments in 14 fish. Fish 10 and  14 have distinct probability distribution.  Recall in Figure 7.4(a) that the model prediction fits  the data of fish 10 and 14 less well than the other fish.  
0.3  0.2  -
....,  - a..  0.1 
.---~-.  1-.-Averagel  1  234  J Segment  Figure 7.8 Average Pk(J) over 14 fish.  5  158  
159  is shown in Figure 7.7 and the average pr:(J) over 14 fish in Figure 7.8. Except for  fish  10 and 14, most of other fish share a  common frequency distribution of J segments.  These results signify  that the VDJ recombination is a  regulated process. Each V and J  segment is  chosen with  at some frequency probability, and the probability is shared across  individuals.  The unequal probability distribution seems to be the result of evolution and  it may help the immune system to quickly explore the large space of VDJ repertoire to  find the best antibody for an external antigen.  7.3 Conclusion and discussion  In summary, we have observed a  strong correlation in the naive VDJ repertoires.  A simple statistical model is proposed to describe  the mechanism of VDJ recombina- tion. The diversity of the VDJ repertoire seems to be generated by a  regulated VDJ  recombination process, in which each  V, D, and J segments is chosen with a  regulated  frequency.  
160  The results here suggest several experiment to exam the diversity of the antibody  repertoire. First, experiments can be performed  to sequence bone marrow antibody  repertoire. This would provide a window to  study the mechanism of VDJ recombination.  In our study, two computational methods are used to distinguish the naive antibody  repertoire from  the activated antibody repertoire. The naive antibody repertoire could  be directly measured by sequencing antibodies in the bone marrow from mice or kid- ney from zebrafish  [83J. Second, to understand how environment and disease affect the  antibody repertoire, individuals from the same and different families and environments  could be sequenced  to investigate the possible feedback control from environment to VDJ  recombination. Alternatively,  an individual's antibody repertoire could be sequenced  multiple times when its environment is changed. Third,  we can sequence siblings' anti- body repertoires at different ages to determine the genetic and epigenetic control of VDJ  recombination.  
Chapter 8  Conclusion  Evidence from protein interaction, protein domain interaction, animal body plan  development, and world trade show  that hierarchy will spontaneously emerge and grow  in evolving systems in  the changing environment. The theory of modularity is  a  general  law in biology and will lead  to new discoveries in biology. Hierarchy in evolving systems  is  shown  to increase the evolvability and robustness of the systems.  Influenza has a  high evolution rate, which makes vaccine design challenging. New  dominant strains can be detected early by low-dimensional clustering. An influenza  vaccine selection procedure  is proposed based on this sequence clustering. The procedure  is demonstrated and tested in detail using historical data.  The performance of the method  to predict the dominant H3N2 strain in an upcoming flu season is  shown using data solely  from before  the flu season. The method was demonstrated on data since 1996. This strain  
162  detection tool would appear to be useful for annual influenza vaccine selection.  The CRISPR provide adaptable immunity to bacteria and archaea. The coevolution  interaction between viruses and bacteria  CRISPR system has shaped the spacer structure  of  CRISPR locus. Both the models and recent experiments support the declining diversity  of spacers towards leader-distal end, implying  that the CRISPR is an actively anti- viral system.  The models explored that the underlying mechanism of shaping spacer  structure is the selection of bacteria CRISPR systems that match best with viruses in  the environment, and the diversity of bacteria CRISPR is  vital for survive.  Naive  VDJ repertoires is shown to have strong correlations in individuals. A simple  statistical model is proposed  to describe the mechanism of VDJ recombination. The  diversity of the VDJ repertoire seems to be generated by a  regulated VDJ recombination  process in which each V, D, and  J segments is  choose with a  regulated frequency.  
163  References  1. Northern hemisphere: Risk of A/Wellington/l/2004{H3N2)-like virus. ProMed.  2004 October  24. Available from http://www.promedmail.org, archive no.  20041024.2879.  2. Seasonal influenza (H3N2) virus - potential vaccine mismatch. ProMed. 2009 July  24. Available from http://www.promedmail.org, archive no. 20090724.2623.  3. Preliminary assessment of the effectiveness of the 2003-04 inactivated influenza  vaccine-colorado, december 2003.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 53:8-11, 2004.  4. Virology  quarterly report Jul-Sep 2004. 2004.  http://www.surv.esr.crLnz/virology/virology_quarterly..!'eport.php.  5. Influenza Weekly  Update.  22-38, 2005.  http://www.surv.esr.cri.nz/virology /influenza_weekly _update.php.  
164  6. Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates. Economic and financial  indicators,  May 2nd, 2009.  7. T. Abeysinghe and K. Forbes. Trade linkages and output-multiplier effects: a  structural var approach with a  focus on asia. NBER Working paper series, 2001.  8. A. Alesina, E. Spolaore, and R. Wacziarg. Trade, growth and the size of countries,  chapter 23, pages 1499-1542. Handbook of economic growth. Elsevier, first edition,  2005.  9. U. Alon. Network motifs: Theory and experimental approaches. Nat. Rev. Genet.,  8:450-461, 2007.  10. J. Anderson. Measurement of protection. 2009. Prepared for the Palgrave Handbook  of International Trade.  11. A. F. Andersson and J. F. Banfield. Virus Population Dynamics and Acquired Virus  Resistance in Natural Microbial Communities.  Science, 320(5879):1047-1050, 2008.  
165  12. G. Apic, J. Gough, and S. A. Teichmann. Domain combinations in archaeal, eu- bacterial  and eukaryotic proteomes. J. Mol. Biol., 310:311-325, 2001.  13.  W. Arthur. The origin of animal body plans: a  study in evolutionary  development  biology.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.  14. Y. Bao, P. Bolotov, D. Dernovoy, B. Kiryutin, L. Zaslavsky, T. Tatusova, J. Ostell,  and D. Lipman. The influenza virus resource at the national center for biotechnol- ogy information.  J. Viral., 82:596-601, 2008.  15.  A. Barabsi and Z. N. Oltvai. Network biology: Understanding the cells functional  organization.  Nat. Rev. Genet., 5:101-113, 2004.  16. M. Barigozzi, G. Fagiolo, and D. Garlaschelli. Multinetwork of international trade:  A commodity-specific analysis.  Phys. Rev. E, 81:046104, 2010.  17. M. Baron, D. G. Norman, and L. D. Campbell. Protein modules. TIBS, 16:13-17,  1991.  
166  18. R. Barrangou et al. CRISPR Provides Acquired Resistance Against Viruses in  Prokaryotes.  Science, 315(5819):1709-1712, 2007.  19. L. D. Bogarad and M. W. Deem. A hierarchical approach to protein molecular  evolution.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96:2591-2595, 1999.  20. A. Bolotin, B. Quinquis, A. Sorokin, and S. Ehrlich. Clustered regularly inter- spaced short palindrome repeats (CRISPRs) have spacers of extrachromosomal  origin. Microbiology, 151:2551, 2005.  21. S. D. Bowring and D. H. Erwin. A new look at evolutionary rates in deep time:  Uniting paleontology  and high-precision geochronology. GSA Today, 8:1-8, 1998.  22. S. J. J. Brouns et al. Small CRISPR RNAs Guide Antiviral Defense in Prokaryotes.  Science, 321(5891):960-964, 2008.  23. I. D. Campbell and M. Baron. The structure and function of protein modules. Phil.  Trans, Biol. Sci.,  332:165-170,1991.  
167  24. V. Carvalho. Aggregate fluctuation and the network structure of intersectoral trade.  eRE! working paper, 2009.  25. J. Chen. The dawn of animal world. Jiangsu Science and Technology Publishing  House, Nanjing, 2004.  26. K. Chen and N. Rajewsky. The evolution of gene regulation by transcription factors  and micrornas. Nature Reviews Genetics, 8:93-103, 2007.  27. A. Clauset, C. Moore, and M. E. J. Newman. Hierarchical structure and the  prediction of missing links in networks. Nature, 453:98-101, 2008.  28.  N. Cox and C. Bender. The molecular epidemiology of influenza viruses. Seminars  in virology, 6:359-370, 1995.  29. J. A. Coyne. Comment on gene regulatory networks and the evolution of animal  body plans. Science, 313:761b, 2006.  
168  30. R. M. Cripps and E. N. Olson. Control of cardiac development by an evolutionarily  conserved transcriptional network.  Development Biology, 246: 14-28, 2002.  31. M. E. Csete and J. C. Doyle. Reverse engineering of biological complexity. Science,  295:1664-1669, 2002.  32.  E. H. Davidson and D. H. Erwin. Gene regulatory networks and the evolution of  animal  body plans. Science, 311:796, 2006.  33.  M. Deem and K. Pan. The epitope regions of HI-subtype influenza A, with ap- plication  to vaccine efficacy. Protein Engineering, Design & Selection, 22:543-546,  2009.  34.  M. W. Deem. Adventures in mathematical biology. Physics Today, 60:42-47, 2007.  35.  H. Deveau et al. Phage response to CRISPR-encoded resistance in streptococcus  thermophilus.  J. Bacteriol., 190(4):1390-1400, 2008.  
169  36. E. Domingo, J. Holland, and C. Biebricher. Quasispecies and RNA virus evolution:  Principles and consequences.  Landes, Austin, TX, 2002.  37. J. W. Drake and J.  J. Holland. Mutation rates among RNA viruses. Proc. Natl.  Acad. Sci. USA,  96:13910-3, 1999.  38.  D. J. Earl and M. W. Deem. Evolvability is a  selectable trait. Proc. Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA,  101:11531-11536, 2004.  39. M. B. Eisen, P. T. Spellman, P. O. Brown, and D. Botstein. Cluster analysis and  display of genome-wide expression patterns.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 95:14863- 14868, 1998.  40. R. J. R. Elliott and K. Ikemoto. AFTA and the Asian crisis: Help or hindrance to  ASEAN intra-regional trade?  Asian Economic Journal, 18(1):1-23, 032004.  41. 1. Elnitski, V. Jin, P. Farnham, and S. Jones. Locating mammalian transcrip- 
170  tion factor binding sites: A survey of computational and experimental techniques.  Genome Res, 16:1455-1464, 2006.  42.  D. H. Erwin and E. H. Davidson. The evolution of hierarchical gene regulatory  networks.  Nat. Rev. Genetics, 10:141-148, 2009.  43.  B. S. Everitt, S. Landau, and M. Leese. Cluster Analysis. Oxford Univ. Press,  2001.  44. FDA. Regulatory considerations regarding the use of novel influenza A (H1N1)  virus vaccines. July 23, 2009.  45.  A. Feeney. Genetic and epigenetic control of v gene rearrangement frequency. Adv.  Exp.  Med. Biol., 650:73-81, 2009.  46.  A. Feeney, A. Tang, and K. Ogwaro. B-cell repertoire formation: Role of the  recombination signal sequence in non-random V segment utilization. Immunol.  Rev.,  175:59-69, 2000.  
171  47. N. Ferguson, A. Galvani, and R. Bush. Ecological and immunological determinants  of influenza evolution.  Nature, 422:428, 2003.  48. W. M. Fitch, R. M. Bush, C. A. Bender, and N. J. Cox. Long term trends in  the evolution of H(3) HAl human influenza type A. Proceedings of the National  Academy  of Sciences of the United States of America, 94(15):7712-7718, 1997.  49. C. Fraser, C. A. Donnelly, S. Cauchemez, W. P. Hanage, M. D. Van Kerkhove, T. D.  Hollingsworth, J. Griffin, R. F. Baggaley, H. E. Jenkins, E. J. Lyons, T. Jombart,  W.  R. Hinsley, N. C. Grassly, F. Balloux, A. C. Ghani, N. M. Ferguson, A. Ram- baut,  O. G. Pybus, H. Lopez-Gatell, C. M. Alpuche-Aranda, 1. B. Chapela, E. P.  Zavala, D. M. E. Guevara, F. Checchi, E. Garcia, S. Hugonnet, C. Roth, and T. W.  R. P.  A. Collaboration. Pandemic potential of a strain of influenza A (H1N1): Early  findings.  Science, 324(5934):1557-1561, 2009.  50. T. Friedman. The world is fiat: A brief history of the twenty-first century. Farra,  
172  Straus and Giroux, 2005.  51. A. Gardener and W. Zuidema. Is evolvability involved in the origin of modular  variation? Evolution,  57:1448-1450, 2003.  52.  R. J. Garten, C. T. Davis, C. A. Russell, B. Shu, S. Lindstrom, A. Balish,  W.  M. Sessions, X. Xu, E. Skepner, V. Deyde, M. Okomo-Adhiambo, L. Gubareva,  J. Barnes,  C. B. Smith, S. L. Emery, M. J. Hillman, P. Rivailler, J. Smagala,  M. de Graaf, D. F. Burke, R. A. M. Fouchier, C. Pappas, C. M. Alpuche-Aranda,  H. Lopez-Gatell, H. Olivera, I. Lopez, C. A. Myers, D. Faix, P. J. Blair, C. Yu, K. M.  Keene, J. Dotson, P. David, D. Boxrud, A. R. Sambol, S. H. Abid, K. St. George,  T. Bannerman,  A. L. Moore, D. J. Stringer, P. Blevins, G. J. Demmler-Harrison,  M. Ginsberg, P. Kriner, S. Waterman, S. Smole, H. F. Guevara, E. A. Belongia,  P. A. Clark, S. T. Beatrice, R. Donis, J. Katz, L. Finelli, C. B. Bridges, M. Shaw,  D. B. Jernigan, T. M. Uyeki, D. J. Smith, A. I. Klimov, and N. J. Cox. Anti- 
173  genic and genetic characteristics of swine-origin 2009 A(H1N1) influenza viruses  circulating in humans.  Science, 325(5937):197-201, 2009.  53. E. Ghedin,  N. A. Sengamalay, M. Shumway, J. Zaborsky, T. Feldblyum, V. Subbu,  D.  J. Spiro, and J. Sitz. Large-scale sequencing of human influenza reveals the  dynamic nature of viral genome evolution. Nature, 437:1162-1166, 2005.  54. S. Gupta, N. Ferguson, and R. Anderson. Chaos, persistence, and evolution of  strain structure in antigenically diverse infectious agents. Science, 280:912, 1998.  55.  V. Gupta, D. J. Earl, and M. Deem. Quantifying influenza vaccine efficacy and  antigenic distance.  Vaccine, 24:3881-3888, 2006.  56. E. Hak, J. Nordin, F. Wei, J. Mullooly, S. Poblete, R. Strikas, and K. Nichol. In- fluence of high-risk medical conditions on  the effectiveness of influenza vaccination  among elderly members of 3  large managed health care organizations.  Clinical  Infectious Diseases,  35(4):370-377, 2002.  
174  57. L. Hartwell, J. J. Hopfield, S. Leibler, and A. W. Murray. From molecular to  modular cell biology. Nature, 402:47-52, 1999.  58.  L. H. Hartwell, J. J. Hopfield, S. Leibler, and A. W. Murray. From molecular to  modular cell biology. Nature, 402:47-52, 1999.  59.  J. He and M. W. Deem. Heterogeneous diversity of spacers within CRISPR  (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats). Phys. Rev. Lett.,  105: 128102, 2010.  60.  J. He and M. W. Deem. Hierarchical evolution of animal body plans. Developmental  Biology,  337:157-161, 2010.  61. J. He and M. W. Deem. Low-dimensional clustering detects incipient dominant  influenza strain clusters. Protein Engineering, Design  & Selection, 23:935-946,  2010.  
175  62. J. He and M. W. Deem. Structure and response in theworld trade network. Phys.  Rev. Lett.,  105:198701, 2010.  63. J. He, J. Sun, and M. Deem. Spontaneous emergence of modularity in a  model of  evolving individuals and in real networks. Phys. Rev. E, 79:031907, 2009.  64. S. Hedges, J. Blair, M. Venturi, and J. Shoe. A molecular timescale of eukaryote  evolution and  the rise of complex multicelluar life. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 4:2,  2004.  65.  S. B. Hedges. The origin and evolution of model organisms. Nature, 3:838-849,  2002.  66. J. F. Heidelberg, W. C. Nelson, T. Schoenfeld, and D. Bhaya. Germ warfare in a  microbial  mat community: CRISPRs provide insights into the co-evolution of host  and viral genomes. PLoB ONE, 4(1):e4169, 01 2009.  
176  67. C. Hidalgo, B. Klinger, A. Barabasi, and R. Hausmann. The product space condi- tions  the development of nations. Science, 317:482-487, 2007.  68. A. E. Hirsh, H. B. Fraser, and D. P. Wall. Adjusting for selection on synony- mous sites in estimates of evolutionary distance. Molecular Biology and Evolution,  22:174-177,2005.  69. A. E. Hirsh, H. B. Fraser, and D. P. Wall. Adjusting for selection on synonymous  sites in estimates of evolutionary distance.  Mol. Biol. Evol., 22:174-177, 2005.  70. P. Horvath and R. Barrangou. CRISPRCas, the immune system of bacteria and  archaea. Science, 327:167, 2010.  71. P. Horvath et al. Diversity, activity and evolution of CRISPR loci in Streptococcus  thermophilus.  J. Bacteriol., pages JB.01415-07, 2007.  72. C. Janeway, P. 'Ifavers, M. Walport, and M. Shlomchik. Immunobiology. Garland  Science, New York, 2005.  
177  73. R. Jansen, J. Embden, W. Gaastra, and L. Schouls. Identification of genes that  are associated with DNA repeats in prokaryotes. Mol. Microbiol., 43:1565, 2002.  74. R.  Kaesler and J. Cairns. Cluster analysis of data from limnological surveys of the  upper potomac river.  American Midland Naturalist, 88:56, 1972.  75.  F. Karginovand G. Hannon. The CRISPR system: Small RNA-guided defense in  bacteria and archaea.  Molecular Cell, 37:7, 2010.  76.  N. Kashtan and U. Alon. Spontaneous evolution of modularity and network motifs.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 102:13773-13778, 2005.  77.  H. Kitano. Biological robustness. Nature Reviews Genetics, 5:826-837, 2004.  78.  G. Koop, M. Pesaran, and S. Potter. Impulse response analysis in nonlinear mul- tivariate models.  Journal of Econometrics, 74:119-147, 1996.  
178  79. A. Lapedes and R. Farber. The geometry of shape space: Application to influenza.  Journal of Theoretical Biology, 212{1}:57 -  69, 2001.  80. M. Levine and E. H. Davidson. Gene regulatory networks for development. Proc.  Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 102:4936-4942, 2005.  81.  H. Lipson, J. B. Pollack, and N. P. Suh. On the origin of modular variation.  Evolution, 56: 1549-1556, 2002.  82.  L. A. Marraffini and E. J. Sontheimer. CRISPR Interference Limits Horizontal  Gene Transfer in Staphylococci by Targeting DNA.  Science, 322{5909}:1843-1845,  2008.  83. N. Meeker and N. Trede. Immunology and zebrafish: Spawning new models of  human disease.  Development and Comparative Immunology, 32:745-757, 2008.  84.  D. Misevic, C. Of ria, and R. E. Lenski. exual reproduction reshapes the genetic  architecture of digital organisms. Proc. Roy. Soc. B, 273:457-464, 2006.  
179  85. M. 1. Nelson and E. C. Holmes. The evolution of epidemic influenza. Nature Reviews  Genetics, 8:196-205, 2007.  86.  M. E. J. Newman. Finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors  of matrices. Phys. Rev.  E, 74:036104, 2006.  87. S. Ng, Z. Zhang, and S. Tan. Integrative approach for computationally inferring  protein domain interactions. Bioinformatics, 19:923-929, 2003.  88.  S. Ng, Z. Zhang, S. Tan, and K. Lin. InterDom: A database of putative interacting  protein domains for validating predicted protein interactions and complexes. Nucl.  Acids Res., 31:251-254,  2003.  89.  M. Nowak and R. May. Virus Dynamics: The Mathematical Foundations of Im- munologyand Virology. Oxford Univ. Press, 2000.  90. V. Odegard and D. Schatz. Targeting of somatic hypermutation. Nature Reviews  Immunology, 6:573, 2006.  
180  91. P. Oikonomou and P. Cluzel. Effects of topology on network evolution. Nature  Physics,  2:532-536, 2006.  92.  K. Pan, K. Subieta, and M. Deem. Quantify seasonal H1N1 influenza vaccine  efficacy  and antigenic distance. 2009. Submitted.  93. R. Perlmutter, J. Kearney, S. Chang, and L. Hood. Developmentally controlled  expression of immunoglobulin VH genes.  Science, 227:1597-1601, 1985.  94. J. B. Plotkin, J. Dushoff, and S. A. Levin. Hemagglutinin sequence clusters and  the antigenic evolution of influenza A virus. Proceedings of the National Academy  of Sciences of the United States of America, 99(9):6263-6268, 2002.  95. C. Pourcel, G. Salvignol, and G. Vergnaud. CRISPR elements in Yersinia pestis  acquire new repeats by preferential uptake of bacteriophage DNA, and provide  additional tool for evolutionary studies.  Microbiology, 151:653, 2005.  96. E. Ravasz,  A. L. Somera, D. A. Mongru, Z. N. Oltvai, and A. L. Barabasi. Hierar- 
181  chical organization of modularity in metabolic networks. Science, 297:1551-1555,  2002.  97.  S. D. Reid, C. J. Herbelin, A. C. Bumbaugh, R. K. Selander, and T. S. Whittam.  Parallel evolution of virulence in pathogenic escherichia coli. Nature, 406:64-67,  2000.  98.  R. Riedl. Order in living organisms: A systems analysis of evolution. Wiley, New  York, 1978.  99.  M. Ronshaugen, N. McGinnis, and W. McGinnis. Hox protein mutation and  macroevolution of  the insect body plan. Nature, 414:914-917, 2002.  100. C.  A. Russell, T. C. Jones, I. G. Barr, N. J. Cox, R. J. Garten, V. Gregory, I. D.  Gust, A. W. Hampson, A. J. Hay, A. C. Hurt, J. C. de Jong, A. Kelso, A. I. Klimov,  T. Kageyama,  N. Komadina, A. S. Lapedes, Y. P. Lin, A. Mosterin, M. Obuchi,  T. Odagiri,  A. D. Osterhaus, G. F. Rimmelzwaan, M. W. Shaw, E. Skepner,  
182  K. Stohr, M. Tashiro, R. A. Fouchier, and D. J. Smith. Influenza vaccine strain  selection and recent studies on the global migration of seasonal influenza viruses.  Vaccine, 26(Supplement 4):D31 -  D34, 2008.  101. C. A. Russell, T. C. Jones, 1. G. Barr, N. J. Cox, R. J. Garten, V. Gregory, 1. D.  Gust, A. W. Hampson, A. J. Hay, A. C. Hurt, J. C. de Jong, A. Kelso, A. 1. Klimov,  T. Kageyama,  N. Komadina, A. S. Lapedes, Y. P. Lin, A. Mosterin, M. Obuchi,  T. Odagiri,  A. D. M. E. Osterhaus, G. F. Rimmelzwaan, M. W. Shaw, E. Skepner,  K. Stohr, M. Tashiro, R. A. M. Fouchier, and D. J. Smith. The global circulation  of seasonal influenza a  (H3N2) viruses. Science, 320(5874):340-346, 2008.  102. C. Santamaria, A. Urue, C. Videla, and et al. Epidemiological study of influenza  virus infections in young adult outpatie: Results. Influenza Resp Viruses, 2:131- 134,2008.  103. Y. Satou and N. Satoh. Gene regulatory networks for the development and evolution  
183  of the chordate heart. Genes Dev., 20:2634-2638, 2006.  104. J. A. Shapiro. A 21st century view of evolution: genome system architecture,  repetitive DNA, and genetic engineering. Gene, 345:91-100, 2004.  105. J. A. Shapiro. Retrotransposons and regulatory suites. BioEssays, 27:122-125,  2005.  106.  S. S. Shen-Orr, R. Milo, S. Mangan, and U. Alon. Network motifs in the transcrip- tional regulation networks of Escherichia  coli. Nature Genetics, 31:64-68, 2002.  107. H. A. Simon. The architecture of complexity. Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 106:467-482,  1962.  108. D. Skowronski. Influenza A (H1N1) -  worldwide (11): Coincident H3N2 varia- tion. ProMed. 2009 May  5. Available from http://www.promedmail.org, archive  no. 20090505.1679.  
184  109. A. Smith. Fossil evidence for the relationships of extant echinoderm classes and  their times of divergence.  In Echinoderm Phylogeny and Evolutionary Biology,  pages 85-97. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1988.  110. D. J. Smith, A. S. Lapedes, J. C. de Jong, T. M. Bestebroer, G. F. Rimmelzwaan,  A. D. M. E. Osterhaus, and R. A. M. Fouchier. Mapping the antigenic and genetic  evolution of influenza virus. Science, 305(5682):371-376, 2004.  111. G. Smith, D. Vijaykrishna, J. Bahl, S. Lycett, M. Worobey, O. Pybus, S. Ma,  C. Cheung, J. Raghwani,  S. Bhatt, J. Peiris1, Y. Guan, and A. Rambaut. Origins  and evolutionary genomics of the 2009 swine-origin H1N1 influenza a  epidemic.  Nature, 459:1122, 2009.  112.  Y. Sobolevsky and E. N. Trifonov. Conserved sequences of prokaryotic proteomes  and their compositional age.  J. Mol. Evol., 61:591-596, 2005.  113. J. Sun and M. W. Deem. Spontaneous emergence of modularity in a  model of  
185  evolving individuals. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99:228107, 2007.  114.  M. Suyama, D. Torrents, and P. Bork. Pal2nal: robust conversion of protein se- quence alignments into  the corresponding codon alignments. Nucleic Acids Res,  34:W609-W612, 2006.  115.  S. Tanase-Nicola, P. B. Warren, and P. R. ten Wolde. Signal detection, modularity,  and the correlation between extrinsic and intrinsic noise in biochemical networks.  Phys. Rev. Lett., 97:068102, 2006.  116.  R. L. Tatusov, E. V. Koonin, and D. J. Lipman. A genomic perspective on protein  families. Science, 278:631-637, 1997.  117.  J. D. Thompson, D. G. Higgins, and T. J. Gibson. Clustal w: improving the  sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weight- ing, position-specific gap penalties  and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res,  22:4673-4680, 1994.  
186  118. E. N. Trifonov and 1. N. Berezovsky. Molecular evolution from abiotic scratch.  FEBS Lettters, 527:1-4, 2002.  119. E. N. Trifonov and 1. N. Berezovsky. Evolutionary aspects of protein structure and  folding.  CUIT. Opinion. Struct. Biol., 13:110-114, 2003.  120. E. N. Trifonov, A. Kirzhner, V. M. Kirzher, and 1. N. Berezovshy. Distinct stages of  protein evolution as suggested by protein sequence analysis.  J. Mol. Evol., 53:394- 401, 2001.  121. J. L. Thrner, J. E. Fielding, H. J. Clothier, and H. A. Kelly. Influenza surveillance  in victoria, 2005.  Communicable Diseases Intelligence, 30(1):137, 2006.  122. G. W. Tyson and J. F. Banfield. Rapidly evolving CRISPRs implicated in acquired  resistance of microorganisms  to viruses. Environmental Microbiology, 10:200-207,  2008.  123. J. Valentine. On the Origin of Phyla. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago., 2004.  
187  124. E. A. Variano, J. H. McCoy, and H. Lipson. Networks, dynamics and modularity.  Phys. Rev. Lett.,  92:188701, 2004.  125.  F. H. Veronica, T. N. Albert, R. A. Cameron, and E. H. Davidson. Developmen- tal gene regulatory network architecture across 500 million years of echinoderm  evolution. Pmc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,  23:13356-13361, 2003.  126. G.  P. Wagner and L. Altenberg. Complex adaptations and the evolution of evolv- ability. Evolution,  50:967-976, 1996.  127.  C. Walcott. Cambrian geology and paleontology. In Smithsonian Miscellaneous  Collections, page  14. 1914.  128.  1. Wapinski, A. Pfeffer, N. Friedman, and A. Regev. Natural history and evolu- tionary principles of gene duplication in fungi. Nature,  449:54-64, 2007.  129. R. G.  Webster. Influenza: an emerging disease. Emerging Infectious Diseases,  4(3) :436-441, 1998.  
188  130. J. A. Weinstein, N. Jiang, 1. White, Richard A., D. S. Fisher, and S. R. Quake.  High-throughput sequencing of  the zebrafish antibody repertoire. Science, 324:807- 810,2009.  131. W.  Wimsatt. Developmental constraints, generative entrenchment, and the innate- acquired distinction. In Intergrating Scientific Disciplines, pages 185-208. Dor- drecht: Martinus-Nijhoff, 1986.  132. W.  Wimsatt and J. Schank. Generative entrenchment, modularity and evolvability:  When genic selection meets the whole organism. In Modularity in development and  evolution,  pages 359-394. U. Chicago Press, Chicago, 2004.  133. World Health Organization.  Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 70:53, 1995.  134. World Health Organization.  Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 71:57, 1996.  135. World Health Organization.  Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 72:57, 1997.  
189  136. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 73:56, 1998.  137. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 74:57, 1999.  138. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 75:61, 2000.  139. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 76:57, 2001.  140. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 77:57, 2002.  141. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 78:57, 2003.  142. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 79:85, 2004.  143. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 80:65, 2005.  144. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 80:341, 2005.  145. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 81:81, 2006.  146. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 82:69, 2007.  
190  147. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 83:77, 2008.  148. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 84:65, 2009.  149. World  Health  Organization.  Pan- demic (H1N1) 2009 -  update  64, 2009 [cited 2010 January 27]. Available from  http://www.who.int/csr/disease/swineflu/updates/en/index.html.  150. World Health Organization. Recommendations for influenza viruses, 2009 [cited  2010 January  27].  Available from  http:// www.who.int/csr/disease/influenza/vaccinerecommendations / en/ index.html.  151. World Health Organization. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec., 85:81, 2010.  152. World  Health Or- ganization. World now  at the start of 2009 influenza pandemic, June 4, 2009.  Available from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2009/.  
191  153. G. Wray. The evolutionary significance of cis-regulatory mutations. Nat. Rev.  Genetics, 8:206-216, 2007.  154. G. Wray, J. Levinton,  and L. Shapiro. Molecular evidence for deep precambrian  divergences among metazoan phyla. Science, 274:568-573, 1996.  155. G. Yancopoulos,  S. Desiderio, M. Paskind, J. Kearney, D. Baltimore, and F. Alt.  Preferential utilization of  the most JH-proximal VH gene segments in pre-B-cell  lines. Nature, 311:727-733, 1984.  156. K. B. Zeldovich, P. Chen, B. E. Shakhnovich, and E. I. Shakhnovich. A first- principles model of early evolution: emergece of gene families, species, and preferred  protein folds.  PLoS Comput. Biol., 3:e139, 2007.  157. H. Zhou, R. S. Pophale, and M. W. Deem. Computer-assisted vaccine design. In  Q. Wang and Y. J. Tao, editors, Influenza: Molecular Virology, chapter 10. Caister  Academic Press, 2010.