Protect Your Consciousness from AI | Jordan Goodman's Blog                         

[

# Jordan Goodman's Blog

](/)

[Home](/) [Blog](/blog/)

# Protect Your Consciousness from AI

_09 Nov, 2025_

One disturbing trend over the years I have noticed is how our society is offloading way too much of our mental processing to AI systems, particularly LLMs.

In the professional world, I see software developers blindly copying and pasting code suggestions from LLM providers without testing it, or understanding it.

On social media, people are using LLMs to generate posts just for impressions, instead of going through the process of finding sources and creating authentic content themselves. This creates a sea of noise and misinformation that people unknowingly consume at scale. I want to bring back authentic forum posts, where people can share their ideas and thoughts, with less algorithmic influence than platforms like X.

In people's personal lives, they use LLMs as their diary, not really being aware of how that information can be used against them in the future. LLMs can be prompted into agreeing with you, which is less likely than with a licensed therapist - it's important to have human to human feedback.

We need to slow down our consumption of these tools. They are certainly useful for certain tasks, but we need to be careful about how much of a dependency we want to create in our daily lives.

    

📡 [RSS Feed](https://jordangoodman.bearblog.dev/feed)

Powered by [Bear ʕ•ᴥ•ʔ](https://bearblog.dev)