LABORATORY FOR tt· MASSACHUSETTS  '.: INSTITIJTE OF  COMPUTER SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY  MIT/LCS/fR-458  TYPECHECKING IS UNDECIDABLE  WHEN 'TYPE' IS A TYPE  Mark B. Reinhold  December 1989  545 TECHNOLOGY SQUARE, CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 02139  
This b/a11k page was i11serted to preserve paginatio11.  
Laboratory for Computer Science  Massachusetts Institute of Technology  CambridgeJ Massachusetts 02139  Typechecking Is Undecidable  When 'Type' Is a Type  Mark B. Reinhold  Technical Report 458  December 1989  Abstract. A function has a dependent type when the type of its result depends upon  the value of its argument. The type of all types is the type of every type, including  itself. In a typed >.-calculus, these two features synergize in a conceptually clean  and uniform way to yield enormous expressive power at very little apparent cost.  By reconstructing and analyzing a paradox due to Girard, we argue that there is  no effective typechecking algorithm for such a  language.  Categories and subject descriptors: F.3.3 [Logics and Meanings of Programs]: Stud- ies of Program Constructs-type structure; F-4-1 [Mathematical Logic and Formal  Languages]: Mathematical Logic-lambda calculus and related systems.  Additional key words and phrases: Polymorphism, propositions-as-types analogy,  intuitionistic logic, Girard's paradox, type theory.  General terms: Languages, theory.  
Copyright © 1989, Mwachu,etts Inmtute &f ~. AD ripts reserved.  Thia report ia a ~ \i'eraion of a w--•• .._ of d11u111ae title, wluda was  supervised by Profeuor Albert R. Meyer wi _._ ... to the l>ep.t,nment of  Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciea ia ~ •M18f. Tu l."eleUGl wu  supported by the National Science FouadaMaa ....... ~••then DC&-8010707  a.nd DCR-8511190.  
1  1. Introduction  1. 1. Dependent function types  A function has a dependent type when the type of its result depends upon the  value of its argument. A simple example of a function with a dependent type is  the unary function zero-vector that, when applied to an integer n, returns an n- vector of zeroes. If all vectors are given the same type vector, then zero-vector  can be given the simple functional type  int-----+ vector .  On the other hand, we may choose to make vector types more informative by having  the type of a vector reflect its length. In this case, vector is not a type constant  but a parameterized type: ( vector n) denotes the type of vectors of length n. We  can thus describe the type of the value (zero-vector n ), for a  given n, as (vector n );  in symbols,  (zero-vector n) : (vector n) ,  where ':' is read as 'has type.' But now zero-vector no longer has the simple  type given above, for the type of (zero-vector n) depends on n; i.e., the type of  (zero-vector n) is a function of n. This suggests that we use the type-returning  function  ,\n:int.(vector n) ,  often called a type generator or a type constructor, as the type of zero-vector,  for it accurately describes the type of the value of zero-vector at the argument n.  However, to maintain the distinction between functions and types, we use II in  place of ,\  as an abstraction symbol for type expressions. We therefore have  zero-vector : Iln:int.(vector n) .  The dependent function type IIx:A.B, also called a general product type, is the  type of functions that map an element a of type A to an element of type B[a/x],  where B[a/x] stands for B with a substituted for all free occurrences of x. Ordinary  function types are a  special case of dependent types, for the type A-----+ B is simply  IIx:A.B, where xis chosen to be an identifier not free in B.  Terms (i.e., programs), which denote functions and values, and type expres- sions, which classify terms, are syntactically and semantically distinct in most ex- plicitly typed programming languages. This distinction permits static typecheck- ing: A term can be typechecked (e.g., by a  compiler) in advance of performing the  computation that it describes. In type systems that support dependent function  
2  §1  types this distinction is blurred, for terms can appear in type expressions and it  may be necessary to perform some computation in order to typecheck a term. For  example, consider the function  neg-vector: Iln:int.(vectorn)-----+ (vectorn)  which, given an integer n, returns a  function that negates each element of a  given  n-vector. When we apply neg-vector to a particular integer, say 23, we obtain a  function  (neg-vector 23): (vector23)-----+ (vector23).  Now suppose that M is a term of type int and that x is a variable of type  (vector M). In order to typecheck the application  ((neg-vector 23) x) ,  we must verify that x is of type (vector 23), and this requires checking that M  computes to 23. While typechecking may require computation, it is still possible  to distinguish between the process of typechecking a term, which may require  performing the computations described by some other terms, and the process of  performing the computation described by the term itself.  1.2. The type of all types  The type of all types is the type of every type, including itself. In symbols, writ- ing '*' for the type of all types, we have A : *  for every type A and, since *  is its  own type, *  : *·  By admitting the type of all types, we admit types as true "first-class" citizens,  allowing types to be treated just like ordinary values. In particular, functions on  types can be defined by ordinary .\-abstraction; e.g., writing 'x' for pair (i.e.,  product) types, we can define  three-tuple =.\A:* .A x A x A  and then write ( three-tuple int) for int x int x int, the type of three-tuples of  integers. Just as functions involving integers have types containing int, so functions  involving types have types containing *· Thus the three-tuple type generator has  type*-----+*; similarly, the parameterized type vector used above has type int-----+*·  In the presence of dependent function types, the type of all types allows the  expression of parametric polymorphism [Strachey 1967, Reynolds 1983], which can  be found in the programming languages CLU [Liskov et al. 1981], Ada [Ada 1980],  
INTRODUCTION  3  Russell [Boehm et al. 1980, Donahue & Demers 1985], and ML [Milner 1983]. In- tuitively, we can think of a polymorphic function as a function mapping types to  values; a polymorphic function has a dependent type because the type of its result  depends upon the value of its argument, which in this case is a type. Polymorphic  functions are easily expressed in a  ,\-calculus with dependent function types and  the type of all types because types can be treated as values: Type variables are  just variables of type *, abstraction with respect to a type variable is done with  ordinary ,\-abstraction, and the application of a polymorphic function to a type is  ordinary function application. For example, let A be a type variable in the function  ,\x:A.x .  By ,\-abstracting over this function with respect to A, we obtain the polymorphic  identity function  id= ,\A:* .,\x:A.x  : IIA:*.A-----+ A.  When id is applied to a type, it yields the identity function on that type; e.g., for  the type int-----+ int,  id (int -----+ int) = ,\x:int -----+ int.x ,  which in this case is a function of type (int-----+ int) -----+ (int-----+ int).  Thus a ,\-calculus with dependent function types and the type of all types  subsumes the polymorphic ,\-calculus of [Girard 1972] and [Reynolds 1974], which  is itself a very rich and powerful language. Any recursive numeric function that  is provably total in second-order Peano arithmetic can be represented in this cal- culus [Girard 1972, Statman 1981, Fortune et al. 1983]; there are no known un- contrived examples of total recursive functions that are not in this class. Many  interesting generic data types can be defined, including pairs, unions, and homo- geneous lists and trees [Reynolds 1985, Bohm & Berarducci 1985].  Going beyond the polymorphic ,\-calculus, in a ,\-calculus with dependent  function types and the type of all types we can apply the programming techniques  of the more powerful Calculus of Constructions [Coquand 1985b, Mohring 1986,  Coquand & Huet 1988]. For example, we can define a form of dependent pair  type, also called a general sum or an existential type, that is useful for modelling  abstract data types [Mitchell & Plotkin 1985, MacQueen 1986].  The combination of dependent function types and the type of all types yields  enormous expressive power at very little apparent cost, and it does so in a  concep- tually clean and uniform way by treating types as values. Unfortunately, we shall  
4  §1  see that the typechecking problem for a  language with these features is undecid- able. That is, there is no effective algorithm for computing the type of a program,  even though the type of every identifier is explicitly declared.  1.3. The >.*-calculus  This thesis is a study of dependent function types and the type of all types in  the setting of the >.*-calculus, which is intended to be a minimal typed >.-calculus  incorporating these two features. The >.*-calculus, defined in §2, can be seen as a  strongly-and explicitly-typed functional programming language in which functions  are first-class values. Functions (>.-terms) are classified by dependent function  types (II-terms), which in turn have type*· As we shall see, many of the familiar  properties of typed >.-calculi hold for the ).* -calculus:  (1) Reduction is Church-Rosser, i.e., confluent.  (2) Reduction is type preserving: If M : A and M -t N, then  N : A, where '-t' denotes the one-step reduction relation on  >.*-terms. In other words, evaluation does not change the type  of a term.  (3) The static typing property holds: The processes of typechecking  a term and of performing the computation that it describes are  distinct, i.e., types need not be checked during evaluation.  However, a number of expected properties fail to hold for the >.*-calculus. In §3  and §4 we shall establish that:  ( 4) Strong normalization fails: There exist terms that have no nor- mal form (i.e., their evaluation does not terminate).  (5) The normal-form relation is undecidable: For two terms Mand  N such that N is a normal form, it is undecidable whether  M ~ N, where '~' denotes the multi-step reduction relation  on ).* -terms.  (6) The equational theory is  undecidable: For two terms Mand N,  it is undecidable whether M =13 N, where '=/3' denotes provable  equality (i.e., program equivalence) under ,8-conversion.  (7) The typing theory is undecidable: For a term M and a type A,  it is undecidable whether M : A.  
INTRODUCTION  5  We normally associate these failed properties with languages in which divergent  recursive computations can be expressed, so it is surprising that ( 4)-(7) apply to  the ,\*-calculus, which has no primitives for recursion and in which recursion is not  obviously definable. The positive forms of ( 4 )-(7) are enjoyed by a variety of typed  >.-calculi, including the simply-typed >.-calculus [Barendregt 1984, Appendix A],  the polymorphic >.-calculus [Girard 1972, Reynolds 1974], and the Calculus of  Constructions [Coquand 1985b, Coquand & Huet 1988].  That strong normalization fails ( 4) for languages like the ,\*-calculus has been  known for some time; the central result of this thesis is that the normal-form  relation is undecidable (5). The undecidability of the equational theory (6) follows  from (5) because, by the Church-Rosser property (1), the equational theory is  characterized by the reduction rules. The undecidability of the typing theory (7)  follows from (5) because computation is  required, in general, in order to typecheck  a term.  1.4. Overview  Girard's paradox. The ,\*-calculus is not a  recent invention: Martin-Lof's first In- tuitionistic Theory of Types [Martin-Lo£ 1971] is a  higher-order constructive logic  that is essentially equivalent to the >.*-calculus. Martin-Lo£ wanted a  single for- malism that would be adequate for the formalization of a substantial portion of  constructive mathematics, and he believed that the ,\*-calculus, with its type of  all types, had sufficient expressive power to meet this requirement. Martin-Lof's  type theory is based upon a  connection between intuitionistic logics and typed  >.-calculi known as the propositions-as-types analogy. Under this analogy, logical  propositions are written as types, and a  proof of a  proposition is a  >.-term of the  appropriate type.  [Girard 1972] showed Martin-Lof's type theory to be inconsistent by refor- mulating the Burali-Forti paradox [Burali-Forti 1897] of classical set theory; this  reformulation has come to be known as Girard's paradox. The upshot of the para- dox is a proof of the absurd proposition, which asserts that every proposition is  provable. In the ,\*-calculus, the absurd proposition is written as the type IIA: * .A,  and Girard's argument describes how to construct a  proof of this proposition, i.e.,  a  closed ,\*-term of this type. It is straightforward to show that no term of this  type has a normal form, and this implies the failure of strong normalization.  Looping combinators. The failure of strong normalization does not, however, imply  the undecidability of normal forms, equations, or typings in the >.*-calculus. In  order to examine the actual non-normalizing term described by Girard's proof,  in §3 we follow the paradox to construct a term Z of type IIA: * .A, using an  
6  §1  improved formulation adapted from [Coquand 1986] and [Howe 1987]. Being too  complex to be carried out by hand, the construction is done with the assistance of  a computer program called LP, which is a  typechecking and reduction engine for  general typed ,\-calculi. Given the typechecking rules for a particular calculus, LP  provides a  Lisp-like interface that accepts an identifier definition, typechecks the  definition, and enters it into the global environment for use in later definitions. LP  and its input language, which is essentially a  sugared version of the ,\*-calculus,  are described in Appendix A.  Observation of the reduction behavior of Z shows that certain of its subterms,  which correspond to formal proofs of lemmas used in the paradox proof, continu- ously reappear at the front of Z as it is reduced. We show how to build a  polymor- phic looping combinator Lo by making minor modifications to the paradox con- struction; this term, written in the LP input language, is contained in Appendix B.  A polymorphic looping combinator Li is a term of type IIA: *.(A--+ A)--+ A such  that, for any type A and function f : A --+ A, we have  where Li+l is another looping combinator. Intuitively, a  looping combinator is  "just as good as" a  fixed-point combinator for the purpose of expressing recursive  computations. Recall that the polymorphic fixed-point combinator Y has the  reduction behavior  (Y A f) --+ f (Y A f) .  The only difference between a  fixed-point combinator Y and a  looping combina- tor L is that an application of Y reduces to a term involving Y itself, while an  application of L reduces to a term involving another, possibly different, looping  combinator.  Undecidability. One way of showing that the normal-form relation of the ,\*-calculus  is undecidable is to show that all partial recursive functions can be defined within it.  As is well known, any partial recursive function can be expressed in terms of  the initial functions and the function-forming operations of composition, primitive  recursion, and minimalization. It would therefore suffice to show that we can  compute, in the ,\*-calculus, all functions constructed in this manner. The primitive  recursion and minimalization operators are typically implemented using a  fixed- point combinator, but true fixed points are not required; all that is necessary is the  ability to iterate a  function an arbitrary number of times. Looping combinators  have exactly this ability, so the undecidability result would follow immediately by  reduction from the halting problem.  
INTRODUCTION 7  Unfortunately, as we di1CUSS in §4, we don't kaow quite ·enoup about the  behavior of the COllltructed leoping combinator-Le·to be able to apply tlus method.  However, we can show that all total recunift ~:-.be computed in the 
.\*-calculus. A simple eomplexity-tb.ecm,tic.....,. the& flO• .tut die normal- form relation of die >f..calculu is ~ ,._ wlJda it followl that the  equation.al and typing theories are undecidable u well.  
8  2. The ,\*-calculus  Terms can appear in type expressions in the ,\* -calculus, so we cannot first define  type expressions and then define the set of terms, as is possible for simpler typed 
.\-calculi. The syntactic machinery of the ,\* -calculus is therefore much like that  of AUTOMATH [Barendregt & Rezus 1983] and the Calculus of Constructions [Co- quand 1985b, Coquand & Huet 1988]. We first define the set A* of raw terms and  a notion of reduction upon them. We then restrict the raw terms to the well-typed  terms through a proof system for typing statements, which are assertions about  the type of a term relative to the types of its free variables. Thus the raw terms  include both the well-typed terms and many other terms that are not well-typed.  2.1. Raw terms  Fix a countably infinite set of variables. In what follows, x, y, and z are metavari- ables for variables and M and N are metavariables for terms. Other capital Roman  letters are occasionally used for terms; in particular, A, B, and C stand for terms  intended to be types. The set A* of raw terms is the smallest set defined by the  following inductive clauses:  XE A*  *EA*  (MN) EA*  (.\x:A.M) E A*  (ITx:A.B) E A*  every variable is a term  '*' is a term  application 
.\-abstraction  IT-abstraction  In a  raw abstraction it is possible to have occurrences of the bound variable x free  in the binding type A; for definiteness we say that such occurrences are not bound  by the binding symbol of the abstraction, but in fact the typing rules will forbid  such occurrences.  We adopt the following variable convention: If a set of terms occurs together,  for example, in a  definition, then all bound variables in these terms are distinct  from each other and from the free variables [Barendregt 1984, Appendix CJ. We also  identify terms modulo the uniform renaming of bound variables ( a-conversion); in  combination with the variable convention, this allows us to work with representa- tives of the a-equivalence classes of terms rather than terms themselves. When  used between terms, '=' denotes syntactic equality modulo a-conversion.  The set of free variables of Mis denoted fv(M), and the substitution of N for  all free occurrences of x in Mis denoted by M[N/x]; both are defined inductively  on the structure of terms in the usual way.  
9  The function type expression A --t B abbreviates (IIx:A.B), where x does not  occur free in B. We follow the familiar convention that --t associates to the right,  so that A --t B --t C abbreviates A --t (B --t C). Application associates to the left  so that (FM N) abbreviates ((FM) N). The vector notation (MN) abbreviates  (M N 1  N2 · · · Nk); similarly, ,\x:A.M abbreviates ,\x1:A1.,\x2:A2. · · · ,\xk:Ak.M.  2.2. Reduction  The one-step reduction relation --t is inductively defined as the least relation sat- isfying the axiom of ,8-contraction,  (,\x:A.M) N--+ M[N/x] ,  and the inference rules:  M --t M' ===} M N --t M' N  N --t N' ===} M N --t M N'  M --t M' ===} (,\x:A.M) --t (,\x:A.M'), (IIx:A.M) --t (IIx:A.M')  A--+ A' ===} (,\x:A.M) --t (,\x:A'.M), (IIx:A.M)--+ (IIx:A'.M) .  Note that there is no notion of ,8-contraction for II-abstractions; this is intentional,  as II-abstractions are dissected only by the typing rules. A term M is a normal  form (nf) iff there is no term N such that M --+ N. The multi-step reduction  relation -is the transitive, reflexive closure of--+, and the conversion relation - is the equivalence relation generated by -· If N is a nf and M -N, we say  that N is a normal form of M. As expected, the Church-Rosser property holds for  reduction:  Lemma 2.1. If M -M1 and M -M2, then there exists an N such  that M1 -N and M2 -N.  Proof See [Martin-Lo£ 1971]. ■  We have the usual corollaries, proved by the same methods as for the untyped  ,\-calculus [Barendregt 1984, §3.1].  Corollary 2.2. M1 -M2 iff there exists an N such that M1 -N and  M2-N.  Corollary 2.3. Normal forms of given terms are unique, if they exist.  
10  §2  The notion of head normal form (hnf) for raw terms, useful in the analysis of  non-normalizing terms, is adapted from the untyped .\-calculus [Barendregt 1984,  Def. 2.2.11]. A term of A* is a hnf iff it is of one of the following forms: 
.\x:A.(* M) 
.\x:A.(y M)  ,\x:A.((ITz:A.B) M)  Nate that x, A, and M may be empty, and y may be free or bound. A term M is  said to have a hnf iff there exists a hnf N such that M ~ N.  Proposition 2.4. If M = (M1 M2) is a  nf, then Mis of the form (ZN),  where Z is either*, a  variable, or a  IT-abstraction.  Proof by induction on the structure of terms, analyzing the structure of M1. If  M1 is*, a  variable, or a  IT-abstraction, then Z = M1 and N = M2. M1 cannot be  a .\-abstraction since M is a  nf. If M1 is an application, then by induction it is of  the form (ZN) for some appropriate Z, so M =((ZN) Mz). ■  Proposition 2.5. If Mis a  nf, then Mis a  hnf.  Proof by induction on the structure of terms. The cases for *, variables, and IT- abstractions are obvious. If M is a .\-abstraction, then by induction its body must  be a  hnf, making M itself a  hnf. If M = (M1 M2) then, by Proposition 2.4, M is  a  hnf. ■  2.3. Well-typed terms  A typing statement consists of a typing and a context. The typing associates a  term with a type, and is a pair of terms written M : A. The context* records the  types of the free variables in the typing, and is a  sequence of typings of variables  ( e.g., (x:A, y:B, z:C) ). The empty context is written (), and the context ~ with  the typing x:A appended is written ~, x:A. A complete typing statement is written  ~ f--M : A and can be read, 'under the variable declarations in ~, the term M  has type A.'  The proof system for typing statements contains one axiom and seven infer- ence rules. Each inference rule consists of a  set of antecedent statements and a  consequent statement, graphically separated by a  horizontal line. A typing state- ment is provable iff it is the axiom, or iff it is the consequent of an inference rule  *Sometimes called a type assignment or type environment.  
THE ,\*-CALCULUS  11  whose antecedents are all provable. A term M is said to have type A iff there is  a context fl such that fl f-M : A is provable, and M is said to be well-typed iff  there is a type A such that M has type A. The proof system is carefully designed  so that every provable typing statement fl f-M : A is well-formed, meaning that  every free variable in fl, M, and A is declared in fl, no variable is declared more  than once, and the type of every declared variable is provably of type *·  The typing rules can be divided into those that manipulate contexts and  those that construct types. The context manipulation rules make use of empty  statements, written fl f-, to indicate that fl alone is well-formed. The context  manipulation rules are:  ( ci)  0 f- context  initialization  fl f- flf-*:*  type of all types  ( ex)  flf-A:*  X </:. fl  context  fl,x:A f- extension  (cp)  fl f- x:AE fl  context  flf-x:A  projection  Note that x:A E fl means that the typing x:A occurs in fl, and x (/. fl means that  there is no typing y:A E fl such that x = y. The (ci) rule simply says that the  empty context is well-formed. The ( *: *) rule allows the introduction of the type  of all types. The ( ex) rule is used to declare a  new variable x of type A after A is  proved to be a type, and the ( cp) rule allows a  previously declared variable to be  projected from the context into a  typing.  (IIf)  (IIi)  (Ile)  ( tc)  The rules for type construction are:  fl,x:A f-B: *  fl f-(IIx:A.B) : *  fl,x:A f-M: B  fl f-(>.x:A.M) : (IIx:A.B)  fl f-M : (IIx:A.B), fl f-N : A  fl f-(MN) : B[N/x]  fl f-M : A, fl f-B : *  flf-M:B  A ~ B  II-formation  II-introduction  II-elimination  type  convers10n  
12  §2  The first three rules construct the type of a term from the types of its subterms,  and correspond exactly to the term formation operations of II-abstraction, >-.- abstraction, and application. The first two rules also modify the context, dis- charging the newly bound variable x. The final rule ( tc) allows the type of a term  to be replaced with a type to which it converts, establishing the connection between  computation and the process of constructing the type of a term.  Notice that each group of rules depends upon the other. The antecedent of the  ( ex) rule is a typing statement that can be proved by any of the type construction  rules, as well as by the ( cp) rule. The antecedents of the type construction rules  are typing statements that can be proved by the ( cp) rule, as well as by the other  type construction rules. In general, the proof of a typing statement requires the  mixed use of both kinds of rules.  2.4. Properties of provable typing statements  The notation 6 f-'P stands for an arbitrary statement; 'P is either a  typing, in  the case of a typing statement, or 'P is empty, in the case of an empty statement.  If 'P = M : A, then fv('P) = fv(M) U fv(A); otherwise, fv('P) = 0. Unless  otherwise noted, the proofs in this subsection proceed by induction on the definition  of statement provability.  Well-formedness. Although contexts are sequences of typings rather than sets of  typings or functions from variables to terms, the proof system is designed so that  a context in a  provable statement will never contain more than one typing for any  variable.  Lemma 2.6. If 6 f-'P is provable then, for every x:A E 6, there is no  other x:B E 6 for any B.  Thus we can conveniently think of contexts as partial functions from variables to  their declared types; i.e., 6(x) = A iff x:A E 6.  An important property of the proof system is that in a  provable statement  6 f-'P, the type of any free variable in 'P or of any declared variable in 6 is guar- anteed to contain only previously declared variables that are themselves declared  in 6. Certain nonsensical situations can arise if this property does not hold; e.g.,  a  variable can have a type containing itself or an undeclared variable. Because  contexts are sequences, they record the history of the declarations that they con- tain. Relative to a variable x, the previously declared variables in a context 6-i.e.,  those comprising the context in which x was declared-are just those variables that  
THE )..*-CALCULUS  13  precede x in ~-Let ~x denote the proper prefix of~ preceding x:A if x:A E ~- Then we have  Lemma 2. 7. If ~ I-c.p is provable, then fv( c.p) ~ dom ~ and, for each  x Edom~, we have that fv(~(x)) ~ dom~x.  These two lemmas are equivalent to the "variable restrictions" of [Martin-Lof 1971].  Finally, we verify that each term associated with a  declared variable x in a  provable statement is actually a type, i.e., provably of type * in the context in  which x was declared.  Lemma 2.8. If~ I-c.p is provable, then ~x I-~(x) : *  is provable for  each x E dom ~- The type of all types. The type of all types, *, is the type of every type, including  itself. In the >-.*-calculus, a type is any term appearing on the right-hand side of a  colon in a  provable typing statement. Therefore any such term should be provably  of type* in the same context.  Lemma 2.9. If~ I-M: A is provable, then~ I-A:* is provable.  Reduction and typing. The following lemmas, or stronger versions of them, are  proved in [Martin-Lof 1971]; essentially the same proofs work for the >-.*-calculus.  Lemma 2.10 (Replacement). If~, x:A I-M : B and ~ I-N : A are  provable, then~ I-M[N/x] : B[N/x] is provable.  Lemma 2 .11 ( Type Preservation). If ~ I-M : A is provable and M - N, then ~ I-N : A is provable.  Type preservation is sometimes called subject reduction, but we prefer to reserve  that name for its original meaning as a  similar property of untyped >-.-terms [Curry  & Feys 1958, Hindley & Seldin 1986].  Lemma 2.12 ( Unique Typing). If~ I-M: A and~ I-M: Bare  provable, then A -» B.  Static typing. Let any type convertible to the form II.i:A. * be called a *-type. A  term with a *-type A is either a type, if A = *, or a  function returning a type,  i.e., a type generator. If~ I-M : A and A is not a *-type, then the erasure of M,  
14  written JMJ, is defined inductively as follows:  Jxl = x  l(M N)I =  { ~:I JNI)  { IMI  J(,\x:A.M)I = (,\x.JMI)  if ~ f-N : A and A is a *-type,  otherwise.  if A is a *-type,  otherwise.  §2  The erasure map removes all type information from a  given term, including both  types and type generators, yielding a term of the untyped ,\-calculus. (This defini- tion is adapted from the definition of stripping given in [Coquand & Huet 1988].)  Lemma 2.13 (Static Typing). If~ f-M : A is provable and A is not a  *-type, then M -N iff IMJ -INI.  In other words, the reduction path of a well-typed term coincides with the reduction  path of its erasure. Therefore it is not necessary to consider any of the type  information in a term when performing the computation that it describes.  Non-normalizing terms. It seems to be well known that in the ,\*-calculus, and  in other ,\-calculi with type abstraction, no term of type IIA: * .A has a  nf; for  completeness we prove this fact here. It suffices to show that no term of type  IIA: * .A is a  nf, from which it follows by Lemma 2.11 that no such term has a  nf.  Lemma 2.14. If() f-M: (IIA:*.A) is provable, then Mis not a  nf.  Proof We show that Mis not a  hnf; by contraposition from Proposition 2.5, this  implies that M is not a  nf.  Suppose that M is a  hnf; we shall analyze its structure and see that it cannot  possibly have the required type. M cannot be *  because * is not of type IIA: * .A  (the type of* is*, and*+ ITA:*.A, since both are nfs). By Lemma 2.7, M  must be closed, therefore it cannot be a  variable. M cannot be a II-abstraction  because any well-typed II-abstraction has type*·  If Mis an application then, being a  hnf, it must be of the form (Z JV), where  Z is either *, a  II-abstraction, or a  variable. The first two cases are impossible  because such terms can never have II-types, and therefore could not be used as  operators in the (Ile) rule. Since M is closed, Z cannot be a  variable.  If M is a  ,\-abstraction, say ,\A:* .N, then by (IIi) it must be that (A:*) f- N : A is provable. Again, N cannot be* since* is not of type A. If N is a  variable  then, by Lemma 2.7, it must be A, but A is not of type A. N cannot be a  ,\- 
THE ,\*-CALCULUS  15  or IT-abstraction because neither could be of type A. If N is an application then  the analysis of the previous paragraph applies, except that Z cannot be a  variable  because the only declared variable is A, which does not have a IT-type.■  2.5. Some constructions  We now define some of the constructs mentioned in §1, all of which are given  in [Martin-Lo£ 1971]. Named ,\*-combinators will be defined in the following format:  (fa b) = M.  This is shorthand for f Aa:A . .\b:B.M for appropriate types A and B that can  be inferred from the context.  Pairs. An element of a pair, or product, type Ax B contains an element of type A  and an element of type B. A pair type has an injection operation to create pairs  of that type from elements of the component types, and two projection operations,  one for each component.  Ax B = ITX:*.(A-B-X) -x  (pair AB) -.\a:A . .\b:B . .\X:* . .\f:(A-B -X).f ab  : A-B-(A x B)  (left AB) .\z:(A x B).z A  (.\a:A . .\b:B.a)  : (Ax B)-A  ( right AB) = .\z:(A x B).z B (.\a:A . .\b:B.b)  : (Ax B)-B  This is essentially a typed version of the pairing combinator of the untyped .\- calculus. For a : A and b: B, the following pairing axioms are easily verified:  (left A  B (pair A  B a b)) = a  (right AB (pair AB ab))= b  This definition easily generalizes to tuples of arbitrary length [Reynolds 1985].  Unions. An element of a  union, or sum, type A + B contains either an element  of A or an element of B, together with an indication of which kind of element  it contains. A union type has one injection operation for each of the component  
16  §2  types, and a projection operation that allows the element within a union to be  accessed in a type-safe way.  A+ B = IIX:*.(A----+ X)----+ (B----+ X)----+ X  ( inleft AB) = ,\a:A.,\X: * .,\f :A----+ X.,\g:B----+ X.f a  : A----+(A+B)  ( inright AB) = ,\b:B.,\X: * .,\f:A----+ X.,\g:B----+ X.g a  : B ----+ (A+ B)  ( case AB) -,\X: * .,\f:A----+ X.,\g:B----+ X.,\z:(A + B).z X f  g  : IIX:*.(A----+X)----+(B----+X)----+(A+B)----+X  For a: A, b: B, a type X, and functions f: A----+X and g: B----+X, these definitions  satisfy the following union axioms:  ( case A B  X f  g ( inleft A  B  a)) = f  a  ( case A B X f  g ( in right A  B b)) = g b  As with pairs, it is straightforward to generalize this definition to the union of an  arbitrary number of types [Reynolds 1985].  Dependent pairs. A dependent pair type, also called a general sum or an existential  type, is to an ordinary pair type as a dependent function type is to a simple function  type. A dependent pair type is written Ex:A.B, with the E binding x in B. An  element of Ex:A.B can be thought of as a pair consisting of an element a: A and  an element of type B[a/x]; the type of the second element depends upon the value  of the first. When treating dependent pairs as a  defined notion, E cannot be used  as a binding operator; instead, it is a function that maps a type A and a function  B of type A ----+ * into a type:  (EA B) _ IIX: * .(IIa:A.(B a)----+ X)----+ X .  The injection operation for dependent pairs is defined by the combinator  (dpair AB) -,\a:A.,\b:(B a).,\X:*.,\f:(IIa:A.(B a)----+ X).f ab  : IIa:A.(B a)----+ (EA B) ,  which is much like the injection for pairing except that the type of b has been made  dependent upon a.  
THE .\*-CALCULUS  17  The left element of a dependent pair, called the witness, can be extracted via  ( wit AB)= >.s:(E A B).s A (>.a:A.>.b:(B a).a)  : (EA B)-+ A,  and it is straightforward to verify that  ( wit AB ( dpair AB a b)) = a  for a: A and b: (Ba).  The dependent pairs definable in the >.*-calculus have no right-hand projection  operation. One might try defining  ( dright AB) = >.s:(E A B).s (B ( wit AB s)) (,\a:A.>.b:(B a ).b)  : IIs:(E A B).B ( wit AB s) ,  but dright does not have the indicated type; in fact, dright has no type in the  >.*-calculus. Attempting to typecheck the body of dright, under the declarations  A:*, B: A-+*, ands: (EA B), we have  s(witABs): (IIa:A.(Ba)-+(witABs))-+(witABs),  (>.a:A.>.b:(B a).b): (IIa:A.(B a)-+ (Ba)) ;  the body of dright is the application of the first term above to the second, and this  application is not well-typed.  Although there is no right-hand projection for dependent pairs, the right-hand  element can be indirectly accessed via the out operation,  ( out AB)= >.s:(E A  B).>.X: * .>.f:(IIa:A.(B a)-+ X).s X f  (EA B)-+ IIX: * .(IIa:A.(B a)-+ X)-+ X ,  which obeys the axiom  ( out A  B ( dpair A  B  a b) X f) = (f a b)  for a: A, b: (Ba), a type X, and a  function f: IIa:A.(B a)-+ X.  We shall make extensive use of dependent pairs in the construction of Girard's  paradox. A generalization of dependent pairs to dependent tuples, i.e., elements  of type Ex:A.B, is described in §A.  The above definitions of E, dpair, wit, and out can be used without change in  the Calculus of Constructions [Coquand & Huet 1988], but the typing constraints  of that system do not allow the witness of a dependent pair to be a type. A weaker  form of dependent pair, which is definable in both calculi, allows the witness to be  a type but lacks a  witness operator.  
18  2.6. Related systems  The ..\*-calculus is  a rather special-purpose system, having been adapted from [Mar- tin-Lo£ 1971] specifically for the investigation of dependent function types and the  type of all types. In [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] we discussed a more flexible system,  the ..\II-calculus, that was designed for the general study of dependent function  types, both with and without the type of all types. For example, we considered an  extension of the ..\II-calculus that would subsume the polymorphic ..\-calculus while  preserving the properties lost when the type of all types is added. The design of  the ..\II-calculus has been an ongoing project, evolving according to the needs of  our research, and we do not wish to address here the complex issues involved in  designing a truly general ..\-calculus with dependent types. Another advantage of  the simplicity of the ..\*-calculus is that our results can be carried over to other  systems by showing that they are conservative extensions of the ..\*-calculus. This  is a straightforward task in many cases; it would not be as easy if the ..\* -calculus  were more general.  The ,\* -calculus and the ..\II-calculus differ in two ways. First, the context ma- nipulation rules of the ..\II-calculus are much like the thinning rules of Gentzen's  sequent calculus [Kleene 1950]; there is no rule for context projection. We orig- inally thought that this method was superior to the style of the ..\*-calculus, as  it does not require special empty statements to assert the well-formedness of a  context. However, further experience with the proof theory of the ..\II-calculus and  similar systems [Barendregt & Rezus 1983, Coquand 1985b] convinced us other- wise. The second difference is that the ..\II-calculus uses typed equations between 
..\-terms rather than the untyped reduction used in the ..\*-calculus. This choice  complicates the definition of the proof system for typing statements, since it must  also contain inference rules for typed equations; the inference rules for contexts,  typings, and equations are all interdependent and the system as a  whole is more  difficult to reason about. There are other situations in which typed equations are  more appropriate ( e.g., in the study of conservative extensions of algebraic theo- ries by typed ..\-calculi [Breazu-Tannen & Meyer 1987]), but for our purposes the  simpler calculus suffices.  
3. Looping with Girard's paradox  3.1. The ,\*-calculus as a logic  19  [Martin-Lo£ 1971] defines an intuitionistic type theory, i.e., a higher-order construc- tive logic, that is essentially equivalent to the ,\*-calculus. Central to this theory  is the propositions-as-types analogy, which establishes a  connection between intu- itionistic logics and typed ,\-calculi. Also known as the 'formulae-as-types analogy'  and the 'Curry-Howard isomorphism,' the analogy was first discovered for the case  of positive implicational propositional logic by [Curry & Feys 1958] and extended  to first-and second-order intuitionistic logic by [Howard 1969] and [Girard 1972].  Martin-Lof's type theory is based upon a particularly close reading of the anal- ogy, which we briefly review here. More general and complete presentations of the  analogy can be found in [Stenlund 1972] and in [Huet 1986].  An intuitionistic type theory is a  formal system for doing constructive rea- soning about constructible objects. By 'constructible objects' we mean effectively  constructible objects, including effectively computable functions. As we have seen,  a  rich class of computable functions can be defined in the ,\* -calculus, and other  constructible objects, such as pairs and unions, can be built up from functions.  These functions and objects, classified by their types, make up the universe of  discourse of Martin-Lof's type theory.  In constructive reasoning, each logical connective is interpreted as a  specifi- cation of a  class of constructible objects. A proposition is proved by exhibiting an  object in the class that it describes, so proofs themselves are constructible objects.  It turns out that the relationship between a proof and the proposition that it proves  is very much like the relationship between an object and its type, as shown in the  table below.  Proposition  Proof  Type  P/\Q A proof of P, and a proof of Q. PxQ  PVQ  A proof of P, or a proof of Q, and an  P+Q  indication of which is proved.  P=;,Q  An effective method for transforming  p_,,Q  a proof of P into a proof of Q.  Vx:A.P  An effective method that, given any a Ilx:A.P  of type A, produces a proof of P[a/x].  :lx:A.P  A particular a of type A, and a proof  :Ex:A.P  of P[a/x].  
20  §3  This correspondence justifies the key idea of Martin-Leif's type theory: Propositions  and types are identified, as are proofs and objects. Paraphrasing Martin-Leif, a  proposition is the type of its proofs; conversely, a type is the proposition that is  proved by exhibiting an object of that type. When using the ,\*-calculus as a type  theory, we construct objects, which have types, and we prove propositions about  them by constructing other objects, whose types are the propositions ( according  to the above correspondence) being proved.  The type of all types plays a central role in Martin-Leif's type theory. Since  types and propositions are identified,* is not only the type of all types, but also the  type of all propositions.* A predicate is  a parameterized proposition, so a predicate  on a type A is just a function on A returning a proposition, i.e., a function of type  A -t *· Relations are obtained by Currying; e.g., A -t A -t *  is the type of a binary  relation on the type A. Higher-order predicates, i.e., predicates on predicates,  can also be defined; e.g., a predicate on predicates on a type A is a function of  type ( A -t *) -t * · Higher-order quantification is expressible because the type of  a quantifier-bound variable can be any term of type*, including* as well as the  type of any predicate. Thus the absurd proposition V P.P translates directly into 
..L = IIP: * .P; the negation of a proposition P is written -,p -P -t ..L.  3.2. The paradox  The informal construction of Girard's paradox given here is intended to serve as  a guide to the full formal construction, given in §B. We give the essential formal  definitions in this section and prove the required lemmas informally; a lemma  numbered n.m in this section corresponds to lemma m in the full construction.  To aid in the reading of the formal construction, we consistently use the outer  parenthesization convention of ,\-calculus, e.g., (f x ), rather than the traditional  mathematical notation, e.g., f ( x).  The essence of the paradox is this: In a type theory with quantification over all  types, we can construct the set of well-founded sets. We can then define an ordering  on well-founded sets and show that, under this ordering, the set of well-founded  sets is a  well-founded set that precedes itself~a contradiction.  An ordered set A will be represented by a type A, a domain predicate dA :  A -t *, and a (strict) ordering relation r A : A -t A -t *· An element a : A is in  the ordered set A iff ( dA a) holds. A will often be written in place of the three  elements A, dA, and rA that represent A. We stress that this is a strictly visual  device; in a term, A stands not for one term constructed from these three elements  *Moreover, since* is itself a type, *  is also a proposition. As a proposition,* is provable because  there is a term, namely*, of type*, so* is a propositional constant that proves itself(!).  
LOOPING WITH GIRARD 'S PARADOX  21  but exactly for 'A dA ,A'· Bis another ordered set represented by B, dB, and iB,  and similarly for other calligraphic capital letters.  An ordered set A is transitive iff its ordering relation is transitive:  (Trans A) -IIx,y,z:A.(rAX y) .-(,AY z) .-(rA x z).  A predicate C : A .-* on the elements of an ordered set A is a chain iff there  is a base element z : A such that z is in A and z satisfies C, and, for every x : A  satisfying C, there is a y : A satisfying C that is smaller than x:  ( Chain AC) [:Ez:A.(dA z) x (C z)] x [Ilx:A.(C x) .-:Ey:A.(C y) x (,A y  x)]  An ordered set is well-founded iff no chains exist within it, i.e., iff the existence of  a  chain implies absurdity:  ( WF A) = IIC:A .-*.(Chain AC).-..L .  An ordered set A is embedded into an ordered set B by a function f : A .-B  and a bound element b: B iff bis in the domain of B, f is domain-preserving and  monotonic, and the range off is dominated by b:  (EmbedABfb) (dBb)  x [IIx:A.(dA x) .-(dB (f x))]  x [IIx, y:A.(dA x) .-(dA y) .-(rA x y) .-(rB (f x) (f y))]  x [IIx:A.(dAx).-(rB(fx)b)].  The ordering on ordered sets is defined in terms of embedding: A is less than B iff  there exists a  function f and an element b such that f and b embed A into B.  (Embed-ord AB) -:Ef:A .-B.:Eb:B.Embed AB f b .  We abbreviate (Embed AB f b) by A <J,b B, and (Embed-ord AB) by A< B.  Two elements x and y of a type A are intensionally equal iff every predicate  true of x is true of y:  (Eq Ax y) = IIP:(A .-*).(P x) .-(Py).  It is easy to show that intensional equality is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.  We shall abbreviate (Eq Ax y) by x = y when A is obvious.  To represent the ordered set of well-founded sets, we need a type U of ordered  sets, a domain predicate du : U .-* that is true only of the well-founded sets, and  an ordering relation ru : U .-U .-* defined in terms of embeddings. Defining  
22  §3  U presents some difficulties, as we must somehow merge the three components A,  dA, and TA representing an ordered set A into a  single element of type U. It is  tempting to use dependent pair types, but these cannot be made to work due to  the lack of a right-hand projection. The solution is to arrange that the injection of  a particular ordered set A into U is a predicate true of precisely those predicates  true of A. Thus, defining OS-pred as the type of predicates on ordered sets,  OS-pred -IIA: *-(A-t *) -t (A-t A-t *) -t *,  we have U OS-pred -t *, and the injection inj is simply  ( injA) = >.S: OS-pred.S A .  If the injections of two ordered sets are intensionally equal, then any property true  of the first is true of the second.  Lemma 3.1. If (inj A)= (inj B) and (PA), then (PB).  Proof Apply the proof of ( inj A) = ( inj B) to (>.u:U.u P) and the proof of (PA).■  The domain predicate on U is defined  (du u) = EA:*.EdA:A-t *.ErA:A-t A-t *·  (Eq U u ( inj A)) x  ( Trans A) x  ( WF A) ,  and the ordering relation on U is defined  (ru u v) EA:* .EdA:A -t * .ErA:A -t A -t * ·  EB:* .EdB:B -t * .ErB:B -t B -t *.  (Eq U u (inj A)) x (Eq U v (inj B))  x  ( Embed-ord AB) .  We shall write U for the ordered set represented by U, du, and ru.  We now prove the lemmas necessary to show that U is a  well-founded set.  Most lemmas are stated informally, in which case a more formal version of the  same statement follows in square brackets.  Lemma 3.2. Any ordered set in U is transitive and well-founded.  [If (du(inj A)) then (Trans A) and (WF A).]  Proof Follows from Lemma 3.1 and the symmetry of intensional equality.■  Lemma 3.3. If A < B and B <foc,bac C, then there exist f AC and bAc  such that A <tAc,bAc C and (re bAc bBc)- 
LOOPING WITH GIRARD 'S PARADOX  23  Proof Suppose that f AB and bAB embed A into 8. Let !Ac = !Be o JAB, and let  bAc = (f Bc bAB)-It is straightforward to check that the required properties hold.■  Corollary 3.4. The relation < is transitive.  [If A< B and B < C, then A< C.]  The formal proofs of the remaining lemmas require uses of Lemma 3.1 and the  properties of intensional equality; these will not be mentioned in the informal  proofs given here.  Lemma 3.5. U is transitive. [( Trans U).]  Proof Follows immediately from Corollary 3.4. ■  Lemma 3.6. U is well-founded. [( WF U).]  Proof by contradiction. Suppose that C is a  chain in U. The base of C is an  ordered set, say Z, that satisfies du. By Lemma 3.2, Z is well-founded; we shall  contradict this fact by using C to construct a  chain D in Z. Define D to be the  predicate  D -,\a:Z.~Y: * .~dy:Y-+ * .~ry:Y-+ Y-+ * -~f:Y-+ Z.  (C (inj Y)) x (Embed Y Z fa).  To prove that D is a chain in Z, we must show that D has a  base element ao : Z  such that (dz ao), and that every element of Zin D has a  predecessor in D.  Let W be a  predecessor of Z in C. Taking ao to be the bound on the embed- ding from W to Z, we immediately see that (dz ao) and that ao is in D.  If a : Z is in D, then there exists an ordered set Y and a  function f : Y -+ Z  such that Y is in C and Y <t,a Z. Furthermore, there must exist an X in C such  that X < Y since Y is in C. By Lemma 3.3, we have an f' : X-+ Z and a 1  : Z  such that X <t',a' Z. The predecessor of a in Dis a'.■  By Lemma 3.5 and Lemma 3.6, U is a transitive, well-founded set, hence U is  in U, i.e., (du (inj U)).  Next we show that, under the embedding ordering, any ordered set in U is  less than U. Given an ordered set A and an element a : A, the initial segment  of A relative to a is the ordered set Aa represented by the type A, the ordering  relation rA, and the new domain predicate  Lemma 3.7. Any initial segment of an ordered set in U is itself in U.  [If (du(inj A)) and (dA a) for some a: A, then (du (inj Aa)).]  
24  §3  Proof Let A be in U, and let a : A be such that (dA a). The initial segment Aa  is transitive because A is transitive; similarly, any chain in Aa is clearly a  chain  in A. Hence Aa is transitive and well-founded.■  Lemma 3.8. A< U for any ordered set A in U.  [If (du (inj A)), then A< U.]  Proof Let A be in U, and let f: A-t Ube the function mapping an element a: A  to the ordered set Aa. Then f embeds A into U with the embedding bound being  A itself. A satisfies du by hypothesis, and f is domain-preserving by Lemma 3. 7.  Let x and y be elements of A such that (rA x y); the identity function embeds  Ax into Ay with bound x, so f is monotonic. Similarly, for any element x of A,  the identity function embeds Ax into A with bound x, hence the range of f is  dominated by A. ■  By Lemma 3.5, Lemma 3.6, and Lemma 3.8, we have that U < U, and thus  ( ru ( inj U) ( inj U)). The predicate  >..u:U.(u = (inj U))  describes a  chain in U: The base of the chain is ( inj U), and the predecessor of  ( inj U) is just ( inj U). The existence of this chain contradicts Lemma 3.6, and  leads to a proof of _l_ in the formal construction.  3.3. Building a looping combinator  Let Z denote the proof of _l_ obtained by constructing the formal proof of Girard's  paradox; i.e., Z : (IIA: * .A). By Lemma 2.14, Z has no normal form, and hence  the >..*-calculus is not strongly normalizing. Reducing Z, we find that the following  pattern emerges:  Z -(lemma6 Cc) -(lemma2b • • •)  -(lemma6 • • •)  -(lemma2b • • •) -• • •  ,  where lemma6 is the formal proof of Lemma 3.6 and lemma2b is the formal proof  of the second consequence of Lemma 3.2. To convert Z into a  looping combinator,  and thus harness this repetitive pattern, we make the following minor changes to  the paradox construction. First, the absurd type _l_ is replaced by the type of  polymorphic looping combinators, namely  Loop ITA:*.(A-t A)-t A,  
LOOPING WITH GIRARD'S PARADOX  25  in the definition of WF and in the formal proof of Lemma 3. 7. With the redefinition  of WF, Lemma 3.6 becomes  ITC:U -t *-( Chain UC) -t Loop ;  the formal proof lemma6 of Lemma 3.6 must be changed so that, given a  chain C in  U and a proof that C is a  chain, it returns a  looping combinator. The redefinition  of WF further implies that lemma2b, which is used in the body of Lemma 3.6,  will also return a  looping combinator. We thus modify lemma6 to take two more  arguments, a type A and a  function f : A -t A, and we change the body of lemma6  to supply A and f as additional arguments to the proof of Lemma 3.2 and to  apply f to the result of that application. In symbols,  is transformed into  lemma6 _ >.C:U -t * .>.c:( Chain U).  • • • (lemma2b • • •)  lemma6 _ >.C:U -t * .>.c:( Chain U).>.A: * .>.f:A -t A.  · · · f ( ( lemma2b · • •) A f) .  Making these changes to Z yields an initial looping combinator Lo, which is called  loop in §B. Reduction of Lo reveals the pattern  (Lo A f) -(lemma6 Cc A f)  -f ((lemma2b ···)A f)  -f (lemma6 · · · A f)  -f (f ( ( lemma2b • • •) A f)) -   • . • ,  which is exactly the behavior required of a  looping combinator.  We have very convincing evidence that this cyclic pattern continues forever,  i.e., that Lo is a true looping combinator. After 970,000 reductions of Lo by the  LP program, we obtain the combinator  which iterates the given function fat least 69 times. Up to this point, the number  of reductions involved is exponential in the number of iterations obtained. (We  were forced to stop after 970,000 reductions due to virtual memory limitations.)  This empirical analysis of Lo is quite persuasive, but it does not constitute a  proof that Lo is in fact a  looping combinator. [Howe 1987] carried out a  similar  
26  construction of Girard's paradox with the assistance of the NUPRL proof develop- ment system [Constable 1986]. Howe applied the looping combinator construction  method described above [Reinhold 1986], and proved that the resulting term is a  true looping combinator by reasoning about its reduction behavior. More recently,  [Coquand 1987] has proposed an argument that any term of type ..1. must behave in  a regenerative manner similar to that of Z, and that it will do so forever. Assum- ing that this argument can be made rigorous, the correctness of our construction  method follows.  Theorem 3.9. Lo is a  looping combinator.  
27  4. Undecidability  We now prove that the existence of looping combinators in the )..* -calculus im- plies that the normal-form relation of the >..*-calculus is undecidable, from which it  follows that its equational and typing theories are undecidable as well.  As our undecidability proof is somewhat novel, we wish to make it generally  applicable. Therefore, we first prove the result for abstract reduction systems, of  which all typed >..-calculi are instances. We show that if a reduction system is rich  enough to compute all total recursive functions, then the normal-form relation of  the system is undecidable. We then show that a particular reduction system, a  typed >..-calculus with integers and looping combinators (the >..L-calculus), satisfies  these requirements. Finally, we introduce a notion of embedding between reduc- tion systems and prove that embeddings preserve the computability of classes of  functions; by showing how to embed )..L into )..*, we obtain the undecidability result  for the >..*-calculus.  Henceforth, the term 'recursive function' will mean total recursive function.  4.1. Reduction systems  A reduction system is a three-tuple (R,--+ R, · R) consisting of a set R of terms,  a binary reduction relation --+ R ~ R x R, and a binary application operation  ·R E Rx R--+ R. The reflexive, transitive closure of--+ R is written -R· We shall  write · R as though it were left-associative, and sans subscript when it is possible  to do so unambiguously. A reduction system will often be specified by mentioning  only its set of terms.  A term M of a reduction system R is a normal form iff there is no N E R  such that M--+ RN.  The normal-form relation NF(R) of a reduction system R is defined as  NF(R) _ { (M, N) E Rx R I M -N and N a nf} ;  i.e., the set of pairs of terms such that the first reduces to the second, and the  second is a normal form.  A reduction system with numerals is  a four-tuple (R,--+ R, •R, numR) such that  (R,--+ R, ·R) is a reduction system and numR is a  recursive bijection mapping inte- gers to normal forms of R; the range of num R is the set of numerals of R. The fact  that numR is a  bijection implies that the numerals are distinct, that every numeral  is associated with a unique integer, and vice-versa. For an integer n, numR(n) will  be written as Ln-1R, dropping the subscript when the context determines R.  
28  §4  4.2. Undecidability in reduction systems  We must first precisely define what it means for a  recursive function to be com- putable in a reduction system. We say that a total numeric function r..p E Nk ---* N  for some k 2'.'. 0  is numeralwise representable [Kleene 1950] in a reduction system  with numerals R if there is a term F E R such that  This definition is quite general in that it does not specify whether the R-terms  have types nor whether they are open or closed. If we define ii n1, n2, ... , nk for  integers ni (1 ::; i::; k), define F · M = F · M1 · M2 · ... ·Mk for terms F and Mi  (1::; i::; k), and extend the numeral notation L.J to work on vectors in the obvious  way, then ( 1) becomes  (2)  The forward direction of (2) is often called defi.nability [Barendregt 1984,  p. 135]. Given a reduction system Rand a  recursive function r.p, finding an F E R  that defines r.p is usually straightforward. But the fact that F defines r.p does not  imply that F completely characterizes r..p; if F defines r.p but does not numeralwise  represent it (i.e., the reverse direction of (2) does not hold), then it is possible that  F · J1,.J -Lx.J for some x -=f-m.  One way to prove that such an F numeralwise represents r.p is to show that the  Church-Rosser property holds for R. However, a  weaker condition suffices. Define  the unique answer condition for a term F as  Then we have:  Lemma 4.1. Let r..p E Nk---* N be defined by a term Fin a reduction  system with numerals. The unique answer condition holds for F iff F  numeralwise represents r.p.  Proof Straightforward. ■  While the Church-Rosser property applies to an entire reduction system, the  unique answer condition applies only to the particular terms used to define par- ticular functions. Of course, if the Church-Rosser property holds for a reduction  system R, then the unique answer condition holds for all terms in R.  
UNDECIDABILITY  29  At the end of this section, we shall prove that the recursive functions are  numeralwise representable in the ,\*-calculus. Once this is established, we have the  undecidability result via the following:  Theorem 4.2. If the recursive functions are numeralwise representable  in a reduction system R, then NF(R) is undecidable.  Proof Every decidable set has a recursive characteristic function and, by nu- meralwise representability, the graph of any such function is recursive in NF(R).  Therefore every decidable set is recursive in NF(R). Now suppose that NF(R) is  decidable. Then there is a recursive function T E N -N such that every de- cidable set is in TIME(T), the class of sets of deterministic time complexity T.  But this contradicts the time hierarchy theorem of complexity theory [Hopcroft &  Ullman 1979], so NF(R) must be undecidable.■  Representing partial functions. Why not prove the undecidability result by show- ing that the partial recursive functions are numeralwise representable in the ,\*- calculus? To begin with, the previous definition of numeralwise representability is  not adequate for partial functions. If a partial recursive function r.p is undefined at  some argument vector ii, to what shall the representing term F reduce when ap- plied to Ji,) We think of a  >.-term as having computed some value when it reduces  to a normal form, so it is natural to propose that undefined values be represented  by terms with no normal form.*  If we accept this proposal, then we must ensure that F • Lii.J has no normal  form when r.p(ii) is undefined. Recall that in the ,\*-calculus, as in many reduction  systems, there is more than one way to go about reducing a term; i.e., there are  multiple reduction strategies. In particular, there is more than one way to proceed  from F · Lii.J. Hence, we must ensure that no reduction strategy allows F · Lii.J to  reach a normal form when c.p(ii) is undefined.  The minimalization operation is the only possible source of divergence in a  partial recursive function expressed in terms of the initial functions and the stan- dard function-forming operations, and the only known way of implementing min- imalization in the ,\*-calculus is with a  looping combinator. Therefore, to ensure  that minimalization diverges when appropriate, we must ensure that the looping  combinator itself, in any context, cannot reach a normal form under any reduc- tion strategy. The known results about looping combinators in the ,\*-calculus  *Church made this identification early in the development of the untyped ,\-calculus; Barendregt  and Wadsworth later suggested that undefined values be represented by terms with no head  normal form (the so-called unsolvable terms) [Barendregt 1984, §2.2].  
30  §4  only assert the existence of a  single non-normalizing reduction path. If some un- tried strategy allows the looping combinator to reach a normal form, then a term  representing a partial recursive function ({) might have a normal form where ({) is  undefined.  4.3. The >..L-calculus  The typed >..-calculus with integers and looping combinators, the AL-calculus, is an  instance of the finitely-typed >..-calculus [Barendregt 1984, Appendix A]. Rather  than use the traditional syntax, we prefer to use the syntax of >..-terms given in §2.  The only significant difference is that the type of a variable is not part of its name  in our syntax; the type of a variable is given where it is bound, or by the context  in the case of free variables.  The >..L-calculus has a  single base type N, representing the natural numbers,  and the following typed constants for integer arithmetic:  O :N  s:N-+N  c:N-+N-+N-+N  p:N-+N  zero constant  successor  conditional  predecessor  The numerals of >..L are formed from 0 and s. For any terms M and N, define  (M 0  N) -N and (Mi+l N) _ (M (Mi N)); then Li.JL = (si 0). Each numeral  is a normal form simply because none of the 8-reduction rules for the arithmetic  constants, defined below, are applicable to numerals.  (c OX y) -+L X  ( C ( S Z) X y) -+L Y  (p 0) -+L 0  (p (si 0)) -+L (si-1 0)  (i 2: 1)  The final line above is actually a reduction rule scheme, used here because the  simpler rule  (p (s x)) -+L x  expresses a stronger condition than is necessary. In particular, this rule is not  satisfied by the predecessor combinator to be defined in the .-\*-calculus, which  must mimic p in order to embed >..L into ,,\*. The ,,\*-combinator, adapted from the  polymorphic >..-calculus, can compute the predecessor of a numeral, but it cannot  compute the predecessor of (s x) when x is a  variable.  
UNDECIDABILITY  31  The AL-calculus also has a countably infinite set of looping combinators. There  is an initial looping combinator  Lo : (N -+ N) -+ N  and, for every looping combinator Li, there is a  successor looping combinator Li+l  of the same type such that (Li F) -+L F (Li+l F).  From the remarks made above, we have:  Lemma 4.3. The AL-calculus is a reduction system with numerals.  We shall also need:  Lemma 4.4. Reduction in the AL-calculus is Church-Rosser.  Proof Follows immediately from [Barendregt 1984, Theorem 15.3.3]. ■  4.4. Representing recursive functions in the AL-calculus  Closely following [Barendregt 1984, §6.4], we show that the functions that are  numeralwise representable in AL include the recursive functions. For k 2: 1, define  Nk-+ N = N-+ N-+ · · •-+ N -+N .  k  The type Nk-+ N will be the type of a term representing a k-ary numeric func- tion; rather than introducing cartesian product (tuple) types, the k arguments are  "Curried."  Say that a total function <p E Nk-+ N is AL-representable iff it is numeralwise  representable by a  closed term of type Nk -+ N when the AL-calculus is viewed  as a reduction system with numerals. The condition that F be closed and of the  appropriate type is necessary because AL is a typed calculus and we shall construct  new representing terms by applying and abstracting over previously constructed  representing terms.  In each of the propositions leading up to the main lemma, all of the real work  involves proving that some recursive function is definable in AL. That the function  is also representable in AL follows immediately by Lemma 4.4 and Lemma 4.1.  Proposition 4.5. The initial functions are AL-representable.  
32  §4  Proof For the successor function and the zero constant, simply use the successor  and zero constants of )..L. For O :'.S i :'.S k, the i  th  projection function on k-tuples is  represented by the term  If we define  then (1) becomes  ,,.,.k -'x .... ·Nk x ·  "i = A • • Z •  Proposition 4.6. The )..L_representable functions are closed under  composition.  Proof Let 'P E N 1  -N be defined by  (1)  Assume that the k-argument function x is represented by a term G : Nk -N, and  that the !-argument functions 'lj;1, '!p2, ... '!pk are represented by H1, H2, ... , Hk of  type N 1  -N. Then 'P is represented by the term  Proposition 4.7. The >-.L-representable functions are closed under  primitive recursion.  Proof Suppose that 'P E N 1 + 1  -N is defined by the primitive recursive scheme  1.p( n, o) = x( n)  1.p(n, k + 1) = 'lj;(n, k, 1.p(n, k)) ,  that x is represented by a term G : N 1  -N, and that 'lj; is represented by a  term H: N 1 + 2  -N. We shall compute 1.p(n, k) by using a  looping combinator to  iteratively compute 1.p(n, k -1). Letting 'ff stand for the arguments Ln_j, define  F = >.J:N -N.>.x:N.c x (G y) (H y(p x) (f (p x))) .  If we had a true Y combinator, then we could represent 'P by (>.y:N 1
.Y F). How- ever, we only need the looping behavior here in order for F to work as required, so  a  looping combinator Li suffices. We shall show by induction on k that 1.p(y, k) is  
UNDECIDABILITY  33  represented by (Li F LkJ) for any i. By ,\-abstraction, it follows immediately that  c.p is represented by (.\fj:N 1
.Li F LkJ.  For the basis, k = 0 and we have  Li F L0J = Li F 0  -F (Li+l F) 0  -c 0 (G fj) (H fj(p 0) (Li+l F (p 0)))  -GfJ.  Since G represents x by hypothesis, we have that (Li F L0J) represents c.p(fj, 0).  For k + l > 0, we have  Li F Lk + lJ = Li F (s LkJ)  -F (Li+l F) (s LkJ)  -c (s LkJ) (G fl) (H fJ(p (s LkJ)) (Li+l F (p (s LkJ))))  -(H fl (p (s LkJ)) (Li+l F (p (s LkJ))))  -(H fl LkJ (Li+l F LkJ)) .  By induction, we know that (Li+l F LkJ) represents c.p(fj, k ); since H represents 'ljJ  by hypothesis, it follows that (Li F Lk + lJ) represents c.p(fj, k + l ). ■  Proposition 4.8. The AL-representable functions are closed under  minimalization.  Proof Suppose that c.p E Nk ---4 N is defined by  c.p(ii) = μm.x(n, m) = 0  for a numeric function x E Nk+l -N such that Vn.~m.x(n, m) = 0. To compute  c.p(n), we shall use a  looping combinator to recursively check x(ii, 0), then x(n, 1),  and so on until an m is found such that x(n, m) = 0. The search will always  terminate because we have assumed that such an m exists. It is this assumption  that restricts the representability result to the total, as opposed to partial, recursive  functions.  First, let us see how to search in the simple case when k = 0.  Claim. Suppose that 'ljJ E N -N is represented by P : N -N. Then  there is a term search such that (Lo (search P) 0) -LmJ, where m =  (μm.'ljJ(m) = 0).  
34  §4  Proof Define  search ,\g:N -----t N.,\f:N -----t N.,\z:N.c (g z) z (f (s z)).  By induction on m -i, we prove that (Li (search P) Li.J) -Lm.J if i :Sm. If m = i  then '1/J(i) = 0; hence (P Li.J) -0 and we have the following reductions:  Li (search P) Li.J -----t (search P) (Li+l (search P)) Li.J  -c (P Li.J) Li.J (Li+l (search P) (s Li))  -c O Li.J (Li+l (search P) (s Li.J))  On the other hand, if i < m then '1/J( i)  therefore (P Li.J) -Ln.J and we have  n =f-0 ( n exists because 'ljJ is total);  Li (search P) Li.J -c (P Li.J) Li.J (Li+l (search P) (s Li.J))  -c Ln.J Li.J (Li+l (search P) (s Li.J))  -----t Li+l (search P) (s Li.J)  = Li+l (search P) Li+ 1.J .  By induction, (Li+l (search P) Li+ 1.J) -Lm.J. Thus, if we begin searching at 0,  (Lo (search P) 0) will reduce to Lm.J since m ~ 0  for any '1/J. ■  To complete the proof of the proposition, assume that x is represented by a  term G : Nk+l -----t N. For a particular vector of arguments ii, we can compute  μm.x(ii,m) = 0 by defining '1/J(m) = x(ii,m) and computing μm.'1/J(m) = 0. Now  ( G Lii.J) represents 'lj), therefore <p is represented by the term  F = ,\x:Nk .Lo ( search ( G x)) O .  By the claim, (F LiiJ -Lμm.x(ii, m) = o.J for any ii.■  Lemma 4.9. The recursive functions are ,\L-representable.  Proof By the preceding Propositions. ■  Corollary 4.10. The normal-form relation of the ,\L-calculus  is undecidable.  Proof By Lemma 4.9 and Theorem 4.2. ■  
UNDECIDABILITY  35  4.5. Embedding reduction systems  Let R and S be two reduction systems with numerals, and let trans R,S E R--+ S  be a translation function mapping terms of R to terms of S. If M E R, then M  abbreviates transR,s(M). We say that transR,S embeds R into S iff  (1) For every m ~ 0, LmJR -s LmJs,  (2) For any MER and n ~ 0, M -R LnJ ==} M -s LnJ, and  (3) For M,N ER, M ·RN= M ·s N.  In other words, the translation function preserves numerals and reduction paths  ending at numerals, and commutes with the application operators.  Lemma 4.11. Let :F be a  class of numeric functions numeralwise rep- resentable in R. If R can be embedded into S and, for every '{) E :F rep- resented by some F E R, the unique answer condition holds for F E S,  then the functions in :F are numeral wise representable in S.  Proof Suppose that '{) E Nk --+ N is numeralwise represented by a term F E R.  Then, for any n E Nk and m E N, we have  '{)(n) = m {::::::::} F "R LnJR -R LmJR  ==} F "R Ji,JR -s LmJR'  since R can be embedded into S. The embedding translation preserves numerals  and commutes with term application in S, therefore F •s LnJs -s LmJs, so '{) 1s  defined by F E S. By Lemma 4.1, '{) is in fact represented by F. ■  Corollary 4.12. If R can be embedded into Sand the recursive functions  are numeralwise representable in R, then the normal-form relation of S  is undecidable.  Proof By Theorem 4.2 and Lemma 4.11. ■  4.6. Undecidability in the >.*-calculus  We are now ready to prove that the normal-form relation of the >.*-calculus is  undecidable. We can compute on integers in ).* by adapting the polymorphic  Church numerals [Fortune et al. 1983]. Define the numeral type  
36  §4  then the numerals of ).* are defined as  with the zero constant 6 = LOJ*" By inspection, it is evident that the numerals  are distinct and that each is a  closed normal form. The >.*-combinators for the  successor and conditional operators are  s = >.n:N.>.t:*.>.f:t----+ t.>.x:t.f (n t J x),  c = >.n:N.>.a:N.>.b:N.n N (>.z:N.b) a .  To define predecessor, we first need a  special pairing operation on integers that is  definable in terms of c. For terms M, N : N, define  (M, N) = >.n:N.c n MN.  The pair (M,N) is  such that ((M,N) 6) -Mand ((M,N) (sx)) -N. The basic  trick behind the predecessor operation is due to [Kleene 1979] and is explained  in [Fortune et al. 1983, p. 161].  P = >.n:N.n (N -N) (>.z:N -N.((s (z 6)), (z 6))) (6, 6) (s 6) .  From these observations, we have  Lemma 4.13. The ).* -calculus is a reduction system with numerals.  Proposition 4.14. The reduction rules defined for the >.L-constants c  and p are observed by the >.*-combinators c and p, and (si 0) -LiJ*"  Proof by verifying the appropriate reductions. To show (si 0) -LiJ*' proceed by  induction on i. ■  To embed the >.L-calculus into the >.*-calculus, we must define a translation  not only on terms but on types as well, since >.L-terms may contain types. The  translation from ).L_ types to >.*-terms is defined: 
.  N====N,  A----+ B = IIx:A.B.  Because all >.L -types are built from the base type N, there is no possibility that  x will be free in B, so we need not state this as a restriction. The >.L -terms  
UNDECIDABILITY  37  are translated as follows, where L denotes the polymorphic looping combinator  constructed in §3:  s = s  c_c  P=P  Li = Li (N -t N) -t N  x=x  (MN)= (MN)  (,\x:A.M) _ (,\x:A.M)  Lemma 4.15. The above translation embeds ,\L into ,\*, when these  calculi are viewed as reduction systems.  Proof The translation obviously commutes with the application operators. To see  that numerals are preserved, note that, by Proposition 4.14,  To show that M -L Ln_, ==} M -* Ln_,, we proceed by induction on the length of  the ,\L-reduction path from M to Ln_,. If M -tL N by a  ,8-reduction, then the same  ,8-reduction will take place in ,\*. If M -tL N by one of the arithmetic constant  reduction rules, then, by Proposition 4.14, a chain of one or more ,8-reductions  will take M to N in ,\*. If M -tL N by a  looping combinator reduction, then, by  Theorem 3.9, a chain of one or more ,8-reductions will take M to N in ,\*. ■  Theorem 4.16. The normal-form relation of the ,\*-calculus  is undecidable.  Proof By Lemma 2.1, Lemma 4.9, Corollary 4.12, and Lemma 4.15. ■  
38  5. Conclusion  The main results of this thesis can be summarized as follows.  • A family of polymorphic looping combinators can be constructed  in the ,\*-calculus.  • The existence of these looping combinators implies that the re- duction, equational, and typing theories of the calculus are all  undecidable.  We now discuss some practical and theoretical consequences of these results.  Dependent function types in programming languages. The failure of strong normal- ization and the undecidability of the reduction and equational theories of terms is  not surprising for real programming languages, because in such languages we expect  to be able to express possibly divergent recursive computations using primitives  such as letrec. Furthermore, since typechecking may require arbitrary computa- tion, typechecking will be undecidable for a language with recursion and dependent  function types whether it has a type of all types or not.  This might seem to disqualify dependent function types as a  useful feature of  practical programming languages, but there are a number of ways to make them  more palatable. One extreme is taken by CLU, in which parameterized procedures  are similar to functions with dependent types. In CL u, a parameterized procedure  can be applied only to a type or to a constant expression of some built-in type, the  value of which can be computed at compile time. At the other extreme, a  clever  compiler could, in principle, detect any recursive computation that arises during  typechecking by watching for invocations of letrec or other recursion constructs.  Upon detecting a  recursive computation, the compiler could either warn that the  compilation may not terminate or simply refuse to compile the program.  The primary consequence of our result for programming language practice is  that this latter strategy will not work for a language with recursion that subsumes  the ,\*-calculus. Recursive computations can be expressed in such a language using  looping combinators, which cannot be detected by a  compiler. One might object  that it is unlikely that a programmer would, intentionally or otherwise, formalize  Girard's paradox and thereby subvert the typechecker, but we do not know that  simpler looping combinators do not exist.  Dependent pair types. As we saw in §3, dependent pair types correspond to ex- istential propositions under the propositions-as-types analogy. Dependent pair  types seem to have first appeared in [Howard 1969], who distinguished between  weak dependent pairs, which only have an out-like accessing operation, and strong  
39  dependent pairs, which have both left-and right-hand projections. (Having a  left- hand projection and out, but lacking a right-hand projection, the dependent pairs  definable in the )..* -calculus lie between the two.)  [Mitchell & Plotkin 1985] observe that implementations of abstract data types  in languages such as Ada, CL u, and ML can be modelled by weak dependent pairs.  [MacQueen 1986] argues that weak dependent pairs are not flexible enough for  full-fledged "programming in the large," and proposes instead the use of strong de- pendent pairs. Unfortunately, the familiar polymorphic >..-calculus of [Girard 1972]  and [Reynolds 1974] augmented with strong dependent pairs admits the formal- ization of Girard's paradox, which implies the failure of strong normalization, the  ability to construct looping combinators, and thereby the undecidability of nor- mal forms, equality, and typing. This was discovered simultaneously by [Harper &  Mitchell 1986] and [Hook & Howe 1986], who demonstrated that the >..*-calculus  can be simulated in the polymorphic >..-calculus with strong dependent pairs, and  by [Coquand 1986], who argued that Girard's paradox can be carried out in such a  language directly. The difficulties stemming from Girard's paradox can be avoided  either by retreating to weak dependent pairs, or by settling for a  less flexible form  of polymorphism [Mitchell & Harper 1988].  Kernel languages. Our interest in programming languages with dependent function  types and the type of all types was originally sparked by [Burstall & Lampson 1984],  which describes Pebble, a  "kernel language" for abstract data types and modules.  Pebble is a  richer language than the >..*-calculus; it supports dependent function  types and the type of all types, but it also includes recursion, integer and boolean  base types, tuple types, and strong dependent pairs. Yet the type system of Pebble  does not seem to have the full power of that of the >..*-calculus. One major difference  is that Pebble does not allow a-conversion in dependent function types, so that  IIx:A.B and IIy:A.B[y/x] are considered to be two distinct types. The >..*-calculus,  which does not make this distinction, cannot be simulated under this restriction,  and so our results for the >..*-calculus are not directly applicable to Pebble.  Related to Pebble is the typed >..-calculus of [Cardelli 1986], which is  essentially  the >..*-calculus enriched with strong existential and recursive types. This language  subsumes the >..*-calculus, so our results extend to it trivially.  5.1. Context and history of this work  In [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] we claimed the existence of a polymorphic fixed-point  combinator in a typed >..-calculus essentially equivalent to the >..*-calculus. Shortly  before that paper was presented, I found two major flaws in the construction of the  combinator. First, the construction relied upon features not present in the pure  
40  §5  calculus. My construction was based on the presentation in [Martin-Lo£ 1972],  which implicitly uses a  richer language that contains strong dependent pairs and a  flexible primitive recursion operator _for functions on integers. It appears that nei- ther of these constructs can be simulated in the pure >..* -calculus, although this has  not been proved. Second, even under the assumption that these features existed,  I  could not find a  convincing, rigorous proof that the constructed term really was  a  fixed-point operator. On the positive side, I  observed that the constructed term  was a polymorphic looping combinator [Reinhold 1986], and I conjectured that the  construction would lead to a true fixed-point combinator when carried out in the  pure system.  In the fall of 1985 we learned that Thierry Coquand had constructed, and  checked by machine, a  formalization of Girard's paradox in an extension of his  Calculus of Constructions [Coquand 1985a]. Encouraged by this result, in the  spring of 1986 I began working from a preprint of [Coquand 1986] and from [Gi- rard 1972] to obtain a  formalization of the paradox in the pure >..*-calculus. It had  been apparent beforehand that machine assistance would be required in order to  completely check the formal construction. Even the original construction, carried  out in a  richer language, requires about five pages to write down, and checking  it by hand is a  tedious and error-prone process. The obvious complexity of the  construction in the pure >..*-calculus lead to the initial design and development of  LP in the summer of 1986. With this system, I  checked my original construction  and empirically verified that it loops under reduction.  In the meantime, Doug Howe had been working on formalizing and analyzing  Girard's paradox with the aid of the NUPRL proof development system [Consta- ble 1986]. In the fall of 1986 a preprint of [Howe 1987] arrived, in which a more  complete formulation of the paradox than given in [Coquand 1986] is presented.  Howe applied my looping combinator construction method and proved that he  obtained a  looping combinator that was not a  fixed-point operator.  Using Howe's formulation of the paradox, I  was quickly able to complete my  own formalization with the aid of LP and verify that our method was applicable  to it, obtaining the looping combinator Lo. The paradox and the construction  method were presented in §3, and a complete listing of Lo is  given in §B. In light of  Howe's proof and Coquand's more recent argument, mentioned in §3, it does not  seem worth duplicating their work in order to rigorously prove that Lo is in fact a  looping combinator.  An important detail that has been missing from the published work on looping  combinators in the >..*-calculus is the fact that the existence of a  looping combina- tor does not immediately imply the undecidability of normal forms, equations, and  typings in the calculus. Indeed, as discussed in §4, the obvious method for prov- 
CONCLUSION  41  ing undecidability, namely by showing that all partial recursive functions can be  computed, relies upon knowing more than we do about the reduction behavior of  looping combinators in the ,\*-calculus. In §4 we proved by an alternative method  that normal forms, equations, and typings are undecidable in the ,\* -calculus.  5.2. Open questions  The claim of [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] that fixed-point operators exist in the ,\* - calculus was premature, leaving open the following question:  ( 1) Do fixed-point operators exist in the ,\* -calculus?  It seems likely that a  nonexistence proof will require semantic rather than syntactic  methods.  A major theme of [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] that we have not addressed here is  the conservative extension of algebraic theories by typed ,\-calculi [Breazu-Tannen  & Meyer 1987, Breazu-Tannen 1987]. An algebraic theory is conservatively ex- tended by a typed ,\-calculus if, when the function symbols and axioms of the  theory are added to the calculus, the equations provable between algebraic terms  in the calculus are just those that were provable in the original theory. The value  of conservative extension theorems for reasoning about programs is that they al- low the familiar methods of equational reasoning to be used instead of the more  complex methods that have been developed for reasoning about divergent computa- tions [Gordon et al. 1979, Paulson 1984]. In [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] we concluded  that the ,\*-calculus does not conservatively extend every algebraic theory, but this  claim depends upon the existence of a  fixed-point operator. The unknown status  of fixed-point operators and the presence of looping combinators in the ,\*-calculus  raises the question:  (2) Do looping combinators conservatively extend algebraic theories?  To start, one might consider whether the ,\L-calculus of §4 is a  conservative exten- sion of every algebraic theory.  We mention here that a related open question of [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] has  been answered: The pure ,\*-calculus is a  conservative extension of the pure ,\II_  calculus, the typed ,\-calculus with dependent function types [Breazu-Tannen 1986].  Finally, a more pragmatic question is:  (3) Are dependent function types useful of themselves, in the ab- sence of the type of all types or similar constructs?  While dependent types are not explicitly available in many current programming  languages, they occur implicitly in a  variety of ways. For example, a  well-known  
42  limitation of procedures in Pascal is the restriction that an array parameter must  be of a  fixed size that can be determined at compile time. Many implementations  of Pascal overcome this problem by extending the procedure call mechanism so that  the dimensions of an array are passed along with the array itself; the dimensions  are made available to the called procedure via special "dimension" variables.  There are many examples of interesting functions in real programming lan- guages that are typically untyped or weakly typed, but which can be accurately  described by dependent types. Consider the format procedure available in most  dialects of Lisp [Steele 1984) ( equivalently, the printf procedure of C [Kernighan  & Ritchie 1978]). Format is applied to a format string and some number of ar- guments, and patterns in the format string specify how the arguments are to be  printed. While the first argument to format must be a string, the types of the  remaining arguments depend upon the particular patterns given in the string. If  we think of format as a function mapping a string to another function that will  actually perform the output, then format can be given a dependent type, since the  type of the returned function depends upon the value of the string argument.  
43  A. The LP program  A.1. Data structures and algorithms  The core of the LP program is a reduction engine for typed A-terms. Terms are  represented as graphs, much as in [Wadsworth 1971], and reduction is performed  by a  closure-based algorithm similar to that of [ Aiello & Prini 1981].  Once reduction is implemented, it is a  simple matter to implement a type  derivation algorithm that computes the type, if any, of an arbitrary term. Due to  the type conversion ( tc) rule, the proof system for typing statements presented in  §2 is non-deterministic. However, it is not hard to demonstrate that any provable  typing statement has a proof in which the ( tc) rule is used only at the very end of  the proof or immediately before the (Ile) rule, to convert the type of the operand  of an application. This observation leads to the algorithm shown below, expressed  as a  recursively defined function T of type context --t term --t term. The algorithm  traverses an input term by recursive descent, extending the context ~ whenever  an abstraction term is entered.  T~(x) -if x Edom~  then ~(x)  else error: undeclared variable x  T~(*) -*  T ~(ITx:A.B) -if T ~(A) -/-*  then error: type of declared variable is not of type *  else if T(~, x:A)(B)-/-*  then error: II-body does not have type*  else*  T ~(.\x:A.B) _ if T ~(A)-/-*  then error: type of declared variable is not of type *  else (ITx:A.T(~, x:A)(B))  T~(M N) _ let A= T~(M) and B = T~(N)  in if -,pi-term?(A)  then error: operator does not have a II-type  else if bound-var-type(A) + B  then error: ill-typed application  else pi-body(A)[N/x]  
44  §A  A.2. Syntax and sugar  The notation for terms of the .\*-calculus presented in §2 is pleasant enough for  human consumption, but it takes some time to teach a computer how to read it.  As LP was written in Lisp, and we already have text editors with powerful facilities  for editing Lisp-like programs, it was decided to use the list-reading facilities of  the Lisp implementation to parse terms input to LP. Thus the LP input language  is different in appearance from the usual notation. Variables of the .\*-calculus  are represented by symbols in LP ( alphabetic case is significant); beyond that, the  correspondence is:  *  (.\x:A.M)  (ITx:A.B)  (MN)  *  (\x A M)  ( !x A B)  (MN)  Some syntactic sugar is defined. Application, as usual, is left-associative, so  (f a b) is  equivalent to ( (f a) b). An abbreviation for ( ! x A B) is (A -> B)  if x does not occur free in B; '->' is right-associative. A chain of A-abstractions  such as (\x A (\y B (\z C ... ) ) ) may be abbreviated:  (\ ( (x A)  (y B)  (z C)) 
... )  Chains of II-abstractions may be abbreviated in a similar fashion. The let con- struct  is sugar for the application  (let ((x AM)  (y B N)  (z C 0)) 
... )  ( (\ C (x A)  (y B)  (z C)) 
... )  MN 0).  Like Lisp's "read-eval-print" loop, LP has a  top-level "read-type-eval-print"  loop that reads a term, attempts to compute its type, and, if the term is well- typed, prints its type and its normal form. Certain symbols are predefined as LP  
THE LP PROGRAM  45  commands; the most important of these is the def command. A term of the form  (def x M) defines the symbol x in the global environment to be the term M,  if M is well-typed. After this definition, any free occurrence of x, in any term,  will refer to M. Terms in the environment are kept in normal form for efficiency,  but some terms (e.g., any looping combinator) do not have normal forms. The  defx command is used in such cases; it works just like def except that it does not  attempt to reduce the defined term to normal form.  LP has a macro facility that is used to define local abbreviations within the  paradox construction (they are also used in the implementation of dependent tu- ples, described below). A term of the form  expands into N[.M /x]. Macros are expanded from the outside inwards, and ex- pansion takes place before typechecking is done.  A.3. Dependent tuple types  The formulation and proof of Girard's paradox makes frequent use of dependent  pair types. The paradox could, in principle, be formalized using the definitions  of §2, but the resulting term would be rather complex. Certain propositions of  the paradox are expressed as nested dependent pair types, entailing corresponding  nested uses of out to get at the innermost dependent component of an element of  such a type (e.g., consider ru, in which dependent pair types are nested six deep).  Each use of out must mention the result type X of the function f that accesses the  components of the dependent pair;* moreover, the dependent parts of most of the  dependent pair types used in the paradox are themselves composed of conjunctions  of two or three types.  The complexity of terms involving nested dependent pair types motivated the  introduction of dependent tuple types, a generalization of dependent pair types  that is supported in part by the macro expansion mechanism of LP. An element  of a dependent tuple type can be thought of as a record containing named fields  a1:A1, a2:A2, ... , an:An in which the type ti of field ai can depend upon the values  of the preceding fields a1, a2, ... , ai-1• Dependent pair types can also be param- eterized, and the type of each parameter may depend upon the values of pre- vious parameters. (This parameterization could have been done with ordinary  ,\-abstraction, but it was more convenient for the paradox construction to include  it as part of the dependent tuple type construct.)  *Uses of out, which require mentioning the type A and the function B, can be eliminated by  directly applying a dependent pair to the desired X and f, but X must still be given.  
46  A dependent tuple type is declared to LP by a command of the form  (def-dtuple (G ((p1 s1) (p2 s2) ·· · (pk Sk)))  ((a1 t1) (a2 t2) ··· Can tn))) ,  where G is the name of the tuple type, each parameter Pi has type Si, and each  field ai has type ti, The declaration of a tuple type G causes three things to be  defined: G is bound to a term describing the actual type of the tuple, -G is bound  to a constructor function that produces an element of the tuple when applied to  actual parameters and field values of the appropriate type, and ©G is bound to  an accessor macro that can be used to "open up" an entire tuple with a  single  operation, allowing a  field a of a tuple variable x to be accessed as x.a.  Specifically, the above declaration causes G to be defined as  G ->.ff:s.IIX: * .(rra:fx) -x ,  and the constructor function -G to be defined as  -G = >.fJ:s.>.a:f.>.x: * .>.J:(rra:i'.X).f a  II 
........ II .... t .... G ....  : p:s. a:. p.  Finally, the accessor macro COG is defined so that ( COG x if A M), for some variable  x of type ( G if), expands into  (x A (>.x.a1:t1[x":'a/'1][q/fJ]  (>.x.a2:t2[x":'a/'1l[q/fJ] · · ·  (>.x.an:tn[x-:'a/i1l[q/fJ].M) · · ·)) ,  where t[x-:'a/'1] denotes the simultaneous substitution of x,ai for ai int (1 ~ i ~ n).  In words, the application of COG evaluates the body M of type A in an environment  with x,ai bound to the appropriate element of x, for each declared field ai,  
B. The looping combinator  ; ;; polymorphic looping combinator type  (def Loop (!Z * ((Z -> Z) -> Z)))  ; ;; type of relations on a type A  (def Rel (\A* (A-> A->•)))  ; ; ; type of predicates on a type A  (def Pred (\A* (A->•)))  ;; ; transitivity  (def Trans(\ ((A•)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A)))  47  ; unused argument, to get Trans: DS-pred  (!x A (!y A (!z A ((rA x y) -> (rA y z) -> (rA x z)))))))  ;  ;  ; chains  (def-dtuple (Predec ((A•)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (C (Pred A))  (x A)  (ex (C x))))  ((y A)  (cy (Cy))  (ryx (rA y x))))  (def-dtuple (Chain ((A•)  ((z A)  (cz (C z))  (dz (dA z))  (pr ( ! ((x A)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (C (Pred A))))  (ex (C x)))  (Predec A dA rA C x ex)))))  predecessor existence predicate  in chain C,  for every x  in the chain,  there is a y  that is in the chain  and smaller than x  chain C  base of chain  base is in chain  base is in A  predecessors exist  
48  ;;; well-foundedness  (def WF (\ ((A•)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A)))  (!C (Pred A) ((Chain A dA rA C) -> Loop))))  ; ; ; embedding ordered sets  (def-dtuple (Embed ((A•)  ((db (dB b))  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (B •)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))  (f (A -> B))  (b B)))  embedding function  embedding bound  bis in domain of B  (pres-dom (!x A ((dA x) -> (dB (f x))))) f is domain-preserving  (mono (!x A (!y A ((dA x) f is monotonic  -> (dA y)  -> (rA x y)  -> (rB (f x) (f y))))))  (dominate (!x A ((dA x) -> (rB (f x) b)))))) b dominates ran f  ; ;; ordering on ordered sets based on embedding  (def-dtuple (Embed-ord ((A•)  ((f (A-> B))  (b B)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (B •)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))))  (m (Embed A dA rA B dB rB f b))))  embedding function exists  embedding bound exists  together they define an embedding  §B  
I  I  ~~~J U!IJII~ i!UU\llll.L , .. R.11£1#. x:a.-:cw: .. ~A4l1!
1 Jlll!UHll.t l!Jtl!ltll(. g4: Jlkt;titMPAillllU4P@t£AM4M#M4&!#!;:titg!l@Jf ... a4£L  I  THE LOOPING OOY8DATOll  (def lq (\ ((& •>  (s A)  (-y &))  (JP (hN &) ((Pa)-> (Py)))))  (def ..-,rd(\ ((A•)  (a: A))  (: <a. A• a)  (\ ((P ""'&))  (p (Pa)))  p))))  (def eq-aya (\ ((A •>  (it l)  (y l)  <• ( .. '. y)))  (: <Ill', a)  (e C\a I .<&I A a s))  (.......,' a:)))))  (def ect'"trau (\ ((A •>  (a: i)  (J .t)  (a A)  c, <Ill'. J))  (q (a. l J a)))  (:( .. la: a)  c, (\1'' (&t'. •» p))))  49  
50  ; ; ; universal type of ordered sets, and the injection into it  (def DS-pred (!A* ((Pred A)-> (Rel A)->*)))  (def U (DS-pred -> *))  (def inj (\((A*)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A)))  (: u  (\x OS-pred  (x A dA rA)))))  type of predicates on ordered sets  type of predicates on OS-predicates  injection into U  ; ;; Lemma 1. If (inj DA)  (inj DB) and (P DA), then (P OB).  (def lemma1 (\((A*)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (B *)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))  (e (Eq U (inj A dA rA) (inj B dB rB)))  (P OS-pred)  (pA (PA dA rA)))  (: (PB dB rB)  (e (\u U (u P)) pA))))  ; ; ;  domain predicate on U: transitive, well-founded ordered sets only  (def-dtuple (dU ((u U)))  ((A *)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (e (Eq U u (inj A dA rA)))  (t (Trans A dA rA))  (w (WF A dA rA))))  ; ; ; ordering on elements of U: by embedding  (def-dtuple (rU ((u U)  (v U)))  ((A*)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (B *)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))  (i (Eq U u (inj A dA rA)))  (j (Eq U v (inj B dB rB)))  (o (Embed-ord A dA rA B dB rB))))  ordered set DA exists  u = (inj DA)  DA is transitive  DA is well-founded  ordered set DA exists  ordered set OB exists  u = DA  V = DB  DA< DB  §B  
THE LOOPING COMBINATOR.  ; ; ;   L .... 2a. If (dU (inj O.l)), then (Trua Ol).  (def l-.2a  (\ ((A •)  (d.l (Pr41d .l))  (rl (W .l))  (d (dU (inj .l d.l rl))))  (tclU d  (iaj l di rl)  (Trua l d.l rl)  ;; apply 1-1  (1-1 d . .l 4.41. d.rl  141.d  ( .. -.,. U (inj l dl rl) (iaj d..A 4,4l cl.rl) 4.e)  ,....  d.t))))  ; ; ; Lau 2b. lf (dU (inj O.l)). then ow O.l).  ; ; ; IdaUcal in au.c..,_ to l...:&a, u:cept fw reiMllt.  (def 1-.21>  (\ C<I •>  (d.l (Pr41d l))  (rl (a.l l))  (d (dU (iaj l 4l rl))))  (ldU d  (iaj l dl rl)  (V, l d.l d)  ;; apply l.....S  (l..._14 • .l 4.41. cl.rl  &Md  (.....,_ U (iaj l dl rl) (iaj 4,1 d.dl Lrl) 4,♦) 
.,  4.w))))  51  
52  Lemma 3. If DA< OB, and fBC, bBC embed OB into DC, then there exist fAC, bAC  embedding DA into DC such that (rC bAC bBC).  (def-dtuple (L3-conseq ((A*)  type of consequence of lemma3  ((f (A-> C))  (b C)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (C *)  (dC (Pred C))  (rC (Rel C))  (bBC C)))  (m (Embed A dA rA C dC rC f b))  (rb (rC b bBC))))  (def lemma3  (\((A*)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (B *)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))  (C *)  (dC (Pred C))  (re (Rel C))  (oAB (Embed-ord A dA rA B dB rB))  (fBC (B -> C))  (bBC C)  (mBC (Embed B dB rB C dC rC fBC bBC)))  (mlet ((RT (L3-conseq A dA rA C dC rC bBC))) ; result type  (©Embed-ord open oAB  oAB  A dA rA B dB rB RT  (©Embed  oAB.m  A dA rA B dB rB oAB.f oAB.b RT  (©Embed  mBC  B dB rB C dC rC fBC bBC RT  (mlet ((f (\x A (fBC (oAB.f x))))  (b (fBC oAB.b)))  (-L3-conseq A dA rA C dC rC bBC  f  b  ,, embedding of A into C  (-Embed A dA rA C dC rC  f b  open oAB.m  open mBC  function mapping A-> C  upper bound on its range  construct consequence  ; ;  b in domain of C  (mBC.pres-dom oAB.b oAB.m.db)  f preserves domain  (\ ((x A)  (dx (dA x)))  (mBC.pres-dom (oAB.f x)  (oAB.m.pres-dom x dx)))  §B  
THE LOOPING COMBINATOR  ;; f is monotonic  (\ ((x A)  (y A)  (dx (dA x))  (dy (dA y))  (rxy (rA x y)))  (mBC.mono (oAB.f x)  (oAB.f y)  (oAB.m.pres-dom x dx)  (oAB.m.pres-dom y dy)  (oAB.m.mono x y dx dy rxy)))  ; ; ran f dominated by b  (\ ((x A)  (dx (dA x)))  (mBC.mono (oAB.f x)  oAB.b  (oAB.m.pres-dom x dx)  oAB.m.db  (oAB.m.dominate x dx))))  ; ; proof that (rC b bBC)  (mBC.dominate oAB.b oAB.m.db)))))))))  ; ; ; Corollary 4. Embed-ord is transitive.  (def cor4  (\ ((A•)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (B *)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))  (C •)  (dC (Pred C))  (rC (Rel C))  (oAB (Embed-ord A dA rA B dB rB))  (oBC (Embed-ord B dB rB C dC rC)))  (mlet ((RT (Embed-ord A dA rA C dC rC)))  (©Embed-ord oBC  B dB rB C dC rC RT  result type  (let ((1 (L3-conseq A dA rA C dC rC oBC.b)  (lemma3 A dA rA B dB rB C dC rC  oAB oBC.f oBC.b oBC.m)))  (t!lL3-conseq 1  A dA rA C dC rC oBC.b RT  (~Embed-ord A dA rA C dC rC  l.f  l.b  l.m)))))))  53  
54 §B  ; ; ; Lemma 5. (Trans OU).  (def lemmas  (\ ((u1 U)  (u2 U)  (u3 U)  (r (rU u1 u2))  (s (rU u2 u3)))  (mlet ((RT (rU u1 u3)))  result type  open r  (©rU  r  u1 u2 RT  (©rU opens  s  u2 u3 RT  c-ru u1 u3 construct consequence  r.A r.dA  r.rA  s.B s.dB  s.rB  ''  proof that u1  r.i  (inj r.OA)  (inj s.0B)  ''  proof that u3  s.j  ;; (Embed-ord r.OA s.OB)  (cor4 r.A r.dA r.rA  s.A s.dA s.rA  s.B s.dB s.rB  by transitivity of Embed-ord  ;; r.OA < s.OA follows from r.OB = s.OA and r.o: r.OA < r.OB  (lemma1 r.B r.dB r.rB ; connects r.DB to s.OA  s.A s.dA s.rA  ;; proof that (inj r.OB) = (inj s.OA)  (eq-trans U (inj r.B r.dB r.rB) u2 (inj s.A s.dA s.rA)  ;; proof that (inj r.OB) = u2  (eq-sym U u2 (inj r.B r.dB r.rB) r.j)  s.i) ; proof that u2 = (inj s.OA)  , , OS-pred true of r.OB; lemma1 will prove it for s.OA  (\ ((X •)  (dX (Pred X))  (rX (Rel X)))  (Embed-ord r.A r.dA r.rA  X dX rX))  , , proof that above OS-pred is true of r.OB  r.o)  proof of s.OA < s.OB  s.o)))))))  
THE LOOPING COMBINATOR  55  ;; ; Lemma 6. (WF U dU rU).  (def-dtuple CD-chain ((C (Pred U))  (A•)  chain constructed in an ordered set DA  ((B *)  (dB (Pred B))  (rB (Rel B))  (f (B -> A))  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (a A)))  (ci (C (inj B dB rB)))  (m (Embed B dB rB A dA rA fa))))  (def lemma6  (\ ((C (Pred U))  (c (Chain U dU rU C))  (T •)  (fT (T -> T)))  (©Chain  C  U dU rU C  T  (mlet ((uZ c.z)  (duZ c.dz)  (cuZ c.cz))  (let ((cp (Predec U dU rU C c.z c.cz)  Cc.pr c.z c.cz)))  (GPredec  cp  U dU rU C c.z c.cz T  (ClrU  cp.ryx  cp.y c.z T  element of D chain to consider  preceding ordered set DB  embedding function from B to A  proof that OB is in C chain  proof that f embeds DB into DA,  bounded by a  chain in U  proof that C is a chain  ** looping type**  ** looping function**  open c  result type  uZ is base of chain C  uZ in dU  uZ in chain  predecessor of uZ exists and is in C  open predecessor proof  (mlet ((Z cp.ryx.B) (dZ cp.ryx.dB) (rZ cp.ryx.rB) ; the actual OZ  (W cp.ryx.A) (dW cp.ryx.dA) (rW cp.ryx.rA)) ; OW is used in basis  prove that DZ is WF, then apply this to a chain constructed within DZ  (fT ** one loop iteration**  (lemma2b this will prove (WF OZ)  Z dZ rZ  (cp.ryx.j dU duZ)  (D-chain CZ dZ rZ)  proof that (inj DZ) is in dU  chain in DZ  
56  I  I'  I  ; ; proof \Ila\ (D-claaia C Z ell rZ) u a cJwa  c ........  cp.rya.o  ldlfrlJZellrZ  (Qlaia Z ell rZ (►dlaia C Z dZ rZ))  (tlllNd  cp.rya.o.a  II di d Z di rZ ep,r,-x.o~f cp.r,s.o.b  (Cllaia Z dZ rZ (►dlda C Z 411 d))  (·Clada  Z cl% l'Z (D-dlaia C  I dZ rZ)  ; ; baM of cluwl ia OZ is •ll r:11t .. boa4 .,_ proof of DI < OZ  cp.rya •• ,b  ; ; proof \Mt Nff i• ia D--CMia  ( •J>-dlua C Z di rZ c::p,rp. •• b  I  G rlt I 11111••:tt,rlf .... 114 Mt II  cp.rp.o.f 1 •• tit f .. " I to Z  (cp.r;,s.i c: cp.q) ; W » Ja 0  cp.ryx.o.11) ; f --• -. Z  ; : proof tut NH •aUdl• 41 (..-. .... poof of OI < OZ)  cp.rp ••••••  §B  
THE LOOPING COMBINATOR  ;; proof that predecessors exist  (\ ((a Z) ; for every a in OZ  (da (D-chain CZ dZ rZ a))) ; that is in chain D ...  (mlet ((RT (Predec Z dZ rZ (D-chain CZ dZ rZ) a da)))  («ID-chain  ;   open da  da  CZ dZ rZ a RT  (mlet ((Y da.B) (dY da.dB) (rY da.rB))  ;; DY< OZ and (C (inj DY)) by da; since DY is in the  ;; chain C, we can find its predecessor by applying c.pr  (let ((dp (Predec U dU rU C (inj Y dY rY) da.ci)  (c.pr (inj Y dY rY) da.ci)))  (CIPredec ;   open dp  dp  U dU rU C (inj Y dY rY) da.ci RT  («!rU open dp.ryx  dp.ryx  dp.y (inj Y dY rY) RT  (mlet ((X dp.ryx.A) (dX dp.ryx.dA) (rX dp.ryx.rA)  (y-dp.ryx.B) (dY-dp.ryx.dB) (rY~ dp.ryx.rB))  ;; OX< oy-and (C (inj DX)),  ;; so apply lemma3 to get OX< OZ  (let ((1 (L3-conseq X dX rX Z dZ rZ a)  (lemma3 X dX rX Y dY rY Z dZ rZ  ;; proof that OX< DY from OX< oy- (lemma1 y-dY-rY-Y dY rY  (eq-sym U (inj Y dY rY)  (inj y-dY-rY-)  dp.ryx.j)  (\ ((A *)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A)))  57  (Embed-ord X dX rX A dA rA))  T fT)  )))))))))  (CIL3-conseq  1  dp.ryx.o)  ,, embedding from DY to DZ  da.fada.m)))  open lemma3 result  X dX rX Z dZ rZ a RT  ;; proof that l.b is predecessor of a in D chain  ("Predec  Z dZ rZ (D-chain CZ dZ rZ) a da  l.b  ;; proof that l.b is in D  ("D-chain CZ dZ rZ l.b  X dX rX ; preceding set is OX  l.f ;   embedding function is f  (dp.ryx.i C dp.cy) ; OX is in C  l.m) ; f, l.b embed OX into DZ  ;; proof that l.b precedes a in OZ  1.rb)  )))))))))))))  ** looping arguments to lemma2b **  
58  ;; ; Initial segments of ordered sets,  (def-dtuple (Seg ((A•)  ((d (dA x))  (r (rA x a))))  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (a A)  (x A)))  segment of DA  determined by a  xis in DA  x less than a  ; ; ; Lemma 7. If (dU DA) and (dA a) for some a A, then (dU (inj DAa)).  (def lemma7  (\ ((A•)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (a A)  (di (dU (inj A dA rA)))  (da (dA a)))  (mlet ((iA (inj A dA rA))  (sA (Seg A dA rA a)))  (CldU di iA  (dU (inj A sA rA))  injection of DA into U  segment of DA we're interested in  open di  result type  given proof that DA is transitive  §B  (let ((t (Trans A dA rA)  (lemma2a A dA rA di))  (w (WF A dA rA)  given proof that DA is well-founded  (lemma2b A dA rA di)))  , , prove that (inj DAa) satisfies dU  (-du (inj A sA rA)  A sA rA  ;; proof that (inj DAa): (inj DAa)  (eq-ref U (inj A sA rA))  ,, DAa is transitive  t  DAa is WF since a chain in the segment is a chain in the set  (\ ((C (Pred A))  (c (Chain A sA rA C)))  (OChain c A sA rA C  Loop  (CISeg c.dz A  Loop  (w C  ; open c  ; result type  dA rA a c.z ; open c.dz  ; result type  (-chain A dA rA C  c.z  c.cz  c.dz.d  c.pr)))))))))))  
THE LOOPING COMBINATOR  ; ;; Lemma 8. If (dU (inj DA)), then DA< OU.  (def lemmas  (\ ((A *)  (dA (Pred A))  (rA (Rel A))  (di (dU (inj A dA rA))))  (mlet ((f (\x A (inj A (Seg A dA rA x) rA))) ;  mapping A-> U  (b (inj A dA rA))) bound on mapping  ; ; prove that f embeds DA into U, bounded by b  (-Embed-ord A dA rA U dU rU f b  (-Embed A dA rA U dU rU f b  , ,   embedding bound satisfies domain  di  ,, f preserves domain  (\ ((x A)  (dx (dA x)))  (lemma7 A dA rA x di dx))  ,, f is monotonic  (\ ((x A)  (y A)  (dx (dA x))  (dy (dA y))  (rxy (rA x y)))  (mlet ((sx (Seg A dA rA x))  (sy (Seg A dA rA y)))  (-ru (f x) (f y)  A sx rA  A sy rA  (eq-ref U (inj A sx rA))  (eq-ref U (inj A sy rA))  segment determined by x  segment determined by y  (mlet ((fA (\x Ax))) ;  mapping A-> A  ;; prove that fA embeds (f x) into (f y), bounded by x  (-Embed-ord A sx rA  A sy rA  fA x  (-Embed A sx rA  A sy rA  fA x  ; ;  bound xis in domain of (f y)  (-seg A dA rA y x dx rxy)  ,, fA preserves domain  (\ ((a A)  (da (sx a)))  (GSeg da  A dA rA x a  (Seg A dA rA ya)  (-seg A dA rA ya  da.d  ((lemma2a A dA rA di)  a X y  da.r rxy))))  59  
60  ;; fA is monotonic  (\ ((a A)  (b A)  (da (sx a))  (db (sx b))  Crab (rA a b)))  rab)  ; ;   x dominates ran fA  (\ ((a A)  (da (sx a)))  (CISeg da  A dA rA x a  (rA ax)  da.r))))))))  , ,   b dominates ran f  (\ ((x A)  (dx (dA x)))  (mlet ((sx (Seg A dA rA x)))  segment determined by x  (~ru (f x) b  A sx rA  A dA rA  (eq-ref U (inj A sx rA))  (eq-ref U (inj A dA rA))  (mlet ((fA (\x Ax))) ; mapping A-> A  ; ; prove that fA embeds (f x) into DA, bounded by x  (~Embed-ord A sx rA  A dA rA  fA X  (~Embed A sx rA  A dA rA  fA x  ;; bound is in domain  dx  ,, fA preserves domain  (\ ((a A)  (da (sx a)))  (CISeg da  A dA rA x a  (dA a)  da.d))  fA preserves order  (\ ((a A)  (b A)  (da (sx a))  (db (sx b))  (rab (rA ab)))  rab)  ; ; x dominates ran fA  (\ ((a A)  (da (sx a)))  (CISeg da  A dA rA x a  (rA ax)  da.r)))))))) )))))  §B  
THE LOOPING COMBINATOR.  ;;; Contradiction.  (def u (inj U dU rU))  (def du  (·dU u U dU rU  (eq-nf U 11)  1-5  1 .... 1»  (def ru  (·rU U 11  u clU rU  u clU rU  (~-ref U u)  (eq-nt u it)  (1 ..... U dU rU •>>)  (def C (\y U (lq UY u)))  (def cC (•Chain U dU rU C  1l  (..-,.ref u •>  clu  (\ ((y U)  (rU • 11)  ; cuia ia u  ;,.....'Cl!lnCiaacuia  =------- , ......... ,,  ; .... .  J ............ .,.,  (cY (C y)))  : .... .  (*Pndec V 4IJ l'V C Y CY  (defx loop (l....S C cC)) 
. '  <..-ref U •> :  ( ( ... .,. U Y 11 CY) ;  (\e V (rU • w)) n)  ))))  -.. 
.._.ta•• alao, 
...............  61  
62  References  [Ada 1980] Reference Manual for the Ada Programming Language. 1980. G.P.O.  008-000-00354-8.  [Aiello & Prini 1981] Luigia Aiello and Gianfranco Prini. An efficient interpreter  for the lambda-calculus. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 23(3):383-424,  December 1981.  [Barendregt & Rezus 1983] H. P. Barendregt and Adrian Rezus. Semantics for  classical AUTOMATH and related systems. Information and Control, 59:127-147,  1983.  [Barendregt 1984] H. P. Barendregt. The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Se- mantics. Volume 103 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics,  North-Holland, Amsterdam, second edition, 1984.  [Boehm et al. 1980] Hans J. Boehm, Alan Demers, and James Donahue. An In- formal Description of Russell. Technical Report 80-430, Department of Computer  Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, October 1980.  [Bohm & Berarducci 1985] Corrado Bohm and Alessandro Berarducci. Automatic  synthesis of typed A-programs on term algebras. Theoretical Computer Science,  39(2/3):135-154, August 1985.  [Breazu-Tannen & Meyer 1987] Valeriu Breazu-Tannen and Albert R. Meyer. Com- putable values can be classical (preliminary report). In Principles of Programming  Languages, ACM, January 1987.  [Breazu-Tannen 1986] Valeriu Breazu-Tannen. Personal communication, February  1986. Given two A-calculi Ai and A2 such that A2 is Church-Rosser, A2-reductions  preserve Ai-terms, and the new reductions of A2 are not applicable to Ai-terms, it  is not hard to show that A2 is a  conservative extension of Ai.  [Breazu-Tannen 1987] Valeriu Breazu-Tannen. Conservative Extensions of Type  Theories. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February 1987.  [Burali-Forti 1897] Cesare Burali-Forti. Une questione sui numeri transfiniti. Ren- diconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo, 11:154-164, 1897.  [Burstall & Lampson 1984] R. Burstall and B. W. Lampson. A kernel language  for abstract data types and modules. In Kahn, MacQueen, and Plotkin, editors,  Semantics of Data Types, pages 1-50, Volume 173 of Lecture Notes in Computer  Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, June 1984.  [Cardelli 1986] Luca Cardelli. A Polymorphic A-calculus with Type:Type. Technical  Report 10, Digital Equipment Corporation Systems Research Center, Palo Alto,  California, May 1986.  
63  [Constable 1986] Robert L. Constable. Implementing Mathematics with the Nuprl  Proof Development System. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1986.  [Coquand & Huet 1988] Thierry Coquand and Gerard Huet. The calculus of con- structions. Information and Control, 76(2/3):95-120, February /March 1988.  [Coquand 1985a] Thierry Coquand. Personal communication, December 1985.  [Coquand 1985b] Thierry Coquand. Une Theorie des Constructions. Ph.D. thesis,  Universite de Paris, January 1985. These de troisieme cycle.  [Coquand 1986] Thierry Coquand. An analysis of Girard's paradox. In Logic in  Computer Science, pages 227-236, IEEE, June 1986.  [Coquand 1987] Thierry Coquand. Personal communication, July 1987.  [Curry & Feys 1958] H. B. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic. Volume 1,  North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1958.  [Donahue & Demers 1985] James Donahue and Alan Demers. Data types are values.  ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 7(3):426-445, July  1985.  [Fortune et al. 1983] Steven Fortune, Daniel Leivant, and Michael O'Donnell. The  expressiveness of simple and second-order type structures. Journal of the ACM,  30(1):151-185, January 1983.  [Girard 1972] Jean-Yves Girard. Interpretation fonctionelle et elimination des cou- pures dans l'arithmetique d'ordre superieure. Ph.D. thesis, Universite de Paris VII,  1972.  [Gordon et al. 1979] M. J. Gordon, R. Milner, and C. P. Wadsworth. Edinburgh  LCF. Volume 78 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1979.  [Harper & Mitchell 1986] Robert Harper and John C. Mitchell. Message in the  TYPES electronic forum (types©theory.lcs.mit.edu), April 1986.  [Hindley & Seldin 1986] J. Roger Hindley and Jonathan P. Seldin. Introduction to  Combinators and >..-Calculus. Volume 1  of London Mathematical Society Student  Texts, Cambridge University Press, 1986.  [Hook & Howe 1986] James G. Hook and Douglas J. Howe. Impredicative Strong  Existential Equivalent to Type:Type. Technical Report 86-760, Department of Com- puter Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, June 1986.  [Hopcroft & Ullman 1979] John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Introduction to  Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mas- sachusetts, 1979.  
64  [Howard 1969] W. A. Howard. The formulae-as-types notion of construction. 1969.  Recently published as [Howard 1980].  [Howard 1980] W. A. Howard. The formulae-as-types notion of construction. In  J. P. Seldin and R. Hindley, editors, To H. B. Curry: Essays in Combinatory  Logic, Lambda Calculus, and Formalism, pages 4 79-490, Academic Press, New  York, 1980.  [Howe 1987] Douglas J. Howe. The computational behaviour of Girard's paradox.  In Logic in Computer Science, pages 205-214, IEEE, June 1987.  [Huet 1986] Gerard Huet. Formal structures for computation and deduction. May  1986. First edition of an unpublished manuscript.  [Kernighan & Ritchie 1978] Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie. The C  Programming Language. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1978.  [Kleene 1950] Stephen C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. Van Nostrand,  Princeton, New Jersey, 1950.  [Kleene 1979] Stephen C. Kleene. Origins of recursive function theory. In Founda- tions of Computer Science, pages 371-382, IEEE, 1979.  [Liskov et al. 1981] Barbara Liskov, Russell Atkinson, Toby Bloom, Eliot Moss,  J. Craig Schaffert, Robert Scheifler, and Alan Snyder. CLU Reference Manual.  Volume 114 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981.  [MacQueen 1986] David B. MacQueen. Using dependent types to express modular  structure. In Principles of Programming Languages, pages 277-286, ACM, January  1986.  [Martin-Lo£ 1971] Per Martin-Lof. A Theory of Types. Report 71-3, Department of  Mathematics, University of Stockholm, February 1971.  [Martin-Lof 1972] Per Martin-Lof. An Intuitionistic Theory of Types. Report, De- partment of Mathematics, University of Stockholm, 1972.  [Meyer & Reinhold 1986] Albert R. Meyer and Mark B. Reinhold. 'Type' is not a  type: preliminary report. In Principles of Programming Languages, pages 287-295,  ACM, January 1986.  [Milner 1983] Robin Milner. A proposal for standard ML. Polymorphism, 1(3),  December 1983.  [Mitchell & Harper 1988] John C. Mitchell and Robert Harper. The essence of ML.  In Principles of Programming Languages, pages 28-46, ACM, January 1988.  [Mitchell & Plotkin 1985] John C. Mitchell and Gordon D. Plotkin. Abstract types  have existential type. In Principles of Programming Languages, pages 37-51, ACM,  New York, January 1985.  
REFERENCES  65  [Mohring 1986] Christine Mohring. Algorithm development in the calculus of con- structions. In Logic in Computer Science, pages 84-91, IEEE, June 1986.  [Paulson 1984] Lawrence Paulson. Deriving structural induction in LCF. In Kahn,  MacQueen, and Plotkin, editors, Semantics of Data Types, pages 197-214, Vol- ume 173 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, June 1984.  [Reinhold 1986] Mark B. Reinhold. Looping with Girard's paradox. June 1986.  Unpublished manuscript.  [Reynolds 1974] John C. Reynolds. Towards a theory of type structure. In B.  Robinet, editor, Programming Symposium, pages 408-425, Volume 19 of Lecture  Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1974.  [Reynolds 1983] John C. Reynolds. Types, abstraction, and parametric polymor- phism. In R. E. A. Mason, editor, Information Processing '83, pages 513-523,  North-Holland, 1983.  [Reynolds 1985] John C. Reynolds. Three approaches to type structure. In Hart- mut Ehrig, Christiane Floyd, Maurice Nivat, and James Thatcher, editors, Math- ematical Foundations of Software Development, Volume 185 of Lecture Notes in  Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 1985.  [Statman 1981] Rick Statman. Number theoretic functions computable by poly- morphic programs. In Foundations of Computer Science, pages 279-282, IEEE,  1981.  [Steele 1984] Guy L. Steele, Jr. Common Lisp: The Language. Digital Press, 1984.  [Stenlund 1972] Soren Stenlund. Combinators, >.-Terms, and Proof Theory. D. Rei- del, Dordrecht, Holland, 1972.  [Strachey 1967] Christopher C. Strachey. Fundamental Concepts in Programming  Languages. Lecture notes, International Summer School in Computer Program- ming, Copenhagen, August 1967.  [Wadsworth 1971] Christopher P. Wadsworth. Semantics and Pragmatics of the  Lambda-Calculus. Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 1971.