Chris's Wiki :: blog/sysadmin/OpenBSDToFreeBSDMove   

[Chris Siebenmann](/~cks/) :: [CSpace](/~cks/space/) » [blog](/~cks/space/blog/) » [sysadmin](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/) » OpenBSDToFreeBSDMove

Welcome, guest.

## We're (now) moving from OpenBSD to FreeBSD for firewalls

November 18, 2025

A bit over a year ago I wrote about [why we'd become interested in FreeBSD](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/FreeBSDInterestAndOpenBSD); to summarize, FreeBSD appeared promising as a better, easier to manage host operating system for PF-based things. Since then we've done enough with FreeBSD to have decided that we actively prefer it to OpenBSD. It's been relatively straightforward to convert our firewall OpenBSD PF rulesets to FreeBSD PF and the resulting firewalls have clearly better performance on our 10G network than our older OpenBSD ones did (with less tuning).

(It's possible that the very latest OpenBSD has significantly improved bridging and routing firewall performance so that it no longer requires the fastest single-core CPU performance you can get to go decently. But pragmatically it's too late; FreeBSD had that performance earlier and we now have more confidence in FreeBSD's performance in the firewall role than OpenBSD's.)

There are some nice things about FreeBSD, like [root on ZFS](/~cks/space/blog/unix/FreeBSDZFSRootAppeal), and broadly I feel that it's more friendly than OpenBSD. But those are secondary to its firewall network performance (and PF compatibility); if its network performance was no better than OpenBSD (or worse), we wouldn't be interested. Since it is better, it's now displacing OpenBSD for our firewalls and our latest VPN servers. We've stopped building new OpenBSD machines, so as firewalls come up for replacement they get rebuilt as FreeBSD machines.

(We have a couple of non-firewall OpenBSD machines that will likely turn into Ubuntu machines when we replace them, although we can't be sure until it actually happens.)

Would we consider going back to OpenBSD? Maybe, but probably not. Now that we've migrated a significant number of firewalls, moving the remaining ones to FreeBSD is the easiest approach, even if new OpenBSD firewalls would equal their performance. And the FreeBSD 10G firewall performance we're getting is sufficiently good that it leaves OpenBSD relatively little ground to exceed it.

(There are some things about FreeBSD that we're not entirely enthused about. We're going to be doing more firewall upgrades than we used to with OpenBSD, for one.)

PS: As before, I don't think there's anything wrong with OpenBSD if it meets your needs. We used it happily for years until we started being less happy with its performance on 10G Ethernet. A lot of people don't have that issue.

([6 comments](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/OpenBSDToFreeBSDMove?showcomments#comments).)

Written on [18](/~cks/space/blog/2025/11/18/) [November](/~cks/space/blog/2025/11/) [2025](/~cks/space/blog/2025/).  

«

[A surprise with how '#!' handles its program argument in practice](/~cks/space/blog/unix/ShebangRelativePathSurprise)

[Automatically scrubbing ZFS pools periodically on FreeBSD](/~cks/space/blog/unix/FreeBSDZFSPoolAutoscrubbing)

»

These are my [WanderingThoughts](/~cks/space/blog/)  
([About the blog](/~cks/space/AboutBlog))

[Full index of entries](/~cks/space/blog/__Index)  
[Recent comments](/~cks/space/blog/__RecentComments)

This is part of [CSpace](/~cks/space/FrontPage), and is written by [ChrisSiebenmann](/~cks/space/People/ChrisSiebenmann).  
Mastodon: [@cks](https://mastodon.social/@cks)  
Twitter @thatcks

\* \* \*

Categories: [links](/~cks/space/blog/links/), [linux](/~cks/space/blog/linux/), [programming](/~cks/space/blog/programming/), [python](/~cks/space/blog/python/), [snark](/~cks/space/blog/snark/), [solaris](/~cks/space/blog/solaris/), [spam](/~cks/space/blog/spam/), [sysadmin](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/), [tech](/~cks/space/blog/tech/), [unix](/~cks/space/blog/unix/), [web](/~cks/space/blog/web/)  
Also: [(Sub)topics](/~cks/space/blog/__Topics)

This is a [DWiki](/~cks/space/dwiki/DWiki).  
[GettingAround](/~cks/space/help/GettingAround)  
([Help](/~cks/space/help/Help))

Search: 

* * *

Page tools: [View Source](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/OpenBSDToFreeBSDMove?source), [Add Comment](/~cks/space/blog/sysadmin/OpenBSDToFreeBSDMove?writecomment).

Search: 

Login:  Password:    

* * *

Last modified: Tue Nov 18 23:17:42 2025  

This dinky wiki is brought to you by the Insane Hackers Guild, Python sub-branch.