Freer Monads, More Extensible Effects Oleg Kiselyov Tohoku University, Japan oleg@okmij.org Hiromi Ishii University of Tsukuba, Japan h-ishii@math.tsukuba.ac.jp Abstract We present a rational reconstruction of extensible effects, the re- cently proposed alternative to monad transformers, as the conflu- ence of efforts to make effectful computations compose. Free mon- ads  and  then  extensible  effects  emerge  from  the  straightforward term representation of an effectful computation, as more and more boilerplate is abstracted away. The generalization process further leads to freer monads, constructed without the Functor constraint.
The continuation exposed in freer monads can then be represented as an efficient type-aligned data structure. The end result is the al- gorithmically efficient extensible effects library, which is not only more comprehensible but also faster than earlier implementations.
As  an  illustration  of  the  new  library,  we  show  three  surpris- ingly simple applications: non-determinism with committed choice (LogicT), catching IO exceptions in the presence of other effects, and the semi-automatic management of file handles and other re- sources through monadic regions.
We  extensively  use  and  promote  the  new  sort  of  ‘laziness’, which underlies the left Kan extension: instead of performing an operation, keep its operands and pretend it is done.
Categories and Subject DescriptorsD.3.2  [Programming Lan- guages]:  Language  Classifications—Applicative  (functional)  lan- guages;   F.3.3 [Logics and Meanings of Programs]: Studies of Pro- gram  Constructs—Control  primitives;   F.3.3  [Logics and Mean- ings of Programs]: Studies of Program Constructs—Type structure Keywordsfree monad, Kan extension, effect handler, open union, type and effect system, effect interaction, coroutine 1.    Introduction That monads do not compose was recognized as a problem early on [29]. Two independently-written expressions using different side- effects (and hence monads) are difficult to combine in one program.
Modifying a small part of a large program to use a new side-effect (e.g., adding debug output) sends ripples of changes throughout the code base. The very same difficulty of adding and combining ef- fects has plagued denotational semantics [7]. In fact, monads, in- troduced by Moggi as a way to structure denotational semantics, in- herited that problem. One can identify three approaches to solving it. The most popular is monad transformers [22], implemented in the widely used monad transformer library (MTL). They are based on Moggi’s original idea of “monads with a hole”, adding to it the lifting of monad operations through the transformer stack. The sec- ond approach combines monads through a quite complicated co- product [24], whose simplification has lead to the free monad popu- larized in Data types ` a la carte [30]. The third, presented just before monad transformers, looked at effects as an interaction and intro- duced side-effect–request handlers [7]. That idea of effect handlers, generalizing exception handlers, was picked up in [4, 26], and de- veloped into the language Eff. In Haskell, it was implemented as extensible effects [21] and [17].
We present, in§2, a unifying view: we derive the free monad and extensible effects by progressively abstracting the straightfor- ward term representation of an effectful computation. Extensible effects emerge as the combination of the ideas of free monads and open union. The unifying, rational reconstruction is not only edify- ing: it pointed to the further generalization in§2.4: freer monads, free even from the Functor constraint. Freer (or, free-er, for empha- sis) monad is an algebraic data type that is a monad by the very construction, just like list is a monoid by construction.
Besides intellectually satisfying, the freer monads are more eco- nomical with memory, avoiding rebuilding of the request data struc- ture  on  each  bind  operation.  Mainly,  by  exposing  the  continua- tion the freer monads made it easier to represent it differently, as a  type-aligned  sequence  data  structure  [31],  which  improved  the performance algorithmically.§3 describes the improved extensible effects library and§4 demonstrates its better performance on sev- eral benchmarks, in comparison with MTL and other effect handler libraries.
Our contribution thus isrationally deriving– telling the com- pelling  story  –  of  the  freer  monad,  which  supports  the  easy  ad- dition,  composition  and  also  subtraction  (that  is,  encapsulation) of  effects.  It  is  so  far  the  most  efficient  and  expressive  extensi- ble monad. We demonstrate the expressivity on three applications, which were previously considered difficult for extensible effects or monads in general.§5 shows the exceptionally straightforward im- plementation of non-determinism with committed choice (the Log- icT monad).§6 presents the surprisingly simple implementation of catching IO errors in monads other than IO. At last IO exceptions behave,  with  regard  to  other  effects  (State,  in  particular),  just  as non-IO exceptions. Finally,§7 is the ultimate demonstration of ef- fect encapsulation: monadic regions, re-implementing and simpli- fying the transformer-based library of [19].
§8 describes the related work. The complete code is available at http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/extensible/Eff1.hs.
2.    Derivation of Free-er Monad In this section we derive the freer and extensible monads by pro- gressively removing boilerplate from the term representation of ef- fects. The result, however elegant, has poor performance, to be im- proved in§3.
 2.1    Reader Effect We start with the simplest side effect: dynamic binding, orReader in the MTL terminology.Readercomputations depend on a value supplied by the environment, that is, their context. A side-effect can be understood [7] as an interaction of an expression with its context.
The possible requests can be specified as a data type, which in our case is 1 dataIt   i   a=Pure a |Get (i→It   i   a) Such an algebraic modeling of possible operations was pioneered in Haskell by Hughes [14] and is now known in Haskell as ‘oper- ational’ [1]. Hinze [13] gave the lucid demonstration of this tech- nique, to derive backtracking monad transformers. (We also deal with  non-determinism,  in§5).  The  expressionPure emarks  the computationethat makes no requests, silently working towards a value of the typea. The requestGet kasks the context for the (cur- rent dynamically-bound) value of the typei. Having received the valuei, the computationk i::It i acontinues, perhaps asking for more values from the context. One may hence callGet’s argument ka continuation.
The simplest asking computation is ask::It   i   i ask=Get Pure which immediately returns the received value. Bigger computations are built with the help of the monad bind(=):It iis a monad.
instanceMonad(It i)where −−return::a→It   i   a return=Pure −−(=)::It  i   a→(a→It   i   b)→It   i   b Pure x=k=k x Get k’=k=Get (k’≫k) The last clause in the definition of bind says that a computation that waits for an input and then continues ask’, and after that, as k– is the computation that continues after waiting as the compo- sition ofk’andk. The operation(≫), Kleisli composition, is the composition of effectful functions: (≫)::Monadm⇒(a→m b)→(b→m c)→(a→m c) f≫g=(=g)◦f Here are two examples of bigger Reader computations addGet::Int→It   Int   Int addGet x=ask=\i→return   (i+x) addN::Int→It   Int   Int addN n=foldl  (≫) return   (replicaten  addGet) 0 The latter asks fornnumbers and returns their sum.
The computationsaddGetandaddNmake requests to the con- text. We need to define how to reply, that is, how to “run” these computations. The following interpreter gives the same valueion each request:It i ais indeed interpreted as theReadermonad.
runReader::i→It   i   a→a runReader (Pure v)=v runReader x (Get k)=runReader x (k x) Unlike  the  MTL  Reader,It i amay  be  treated  differently:  each request gets a new value, as if read from an input stream: feedAll::[ i ]→It   i   a→a feedAll (Pure v)=v feedAll   []=error  ”endofstream” feedAll   (h  :   t )  (Get k)=feedAll  t  (k  h) In  this  interpretation,It i ais  called  an  iteratee  andfeedAllan enumerator [18].
1 The choice of the nameItshould become clear shortly.
2.2    Reader/Writer Effect Let us add another effect: rather than asking a context for a value, we tell the context. This is a Writer, or tracing effect.
dataIT  i   o  a=Pure a |Get(i→IT  i   o  a) |Put o (()→IT  i   o  a) ThePut o krequest  tells  the  valueoto  the  context.  After  the context acknowledges with() 2 the computation continues ask ().
The extendedIT i ois also a monad: instanceMonad(IT i o)where return=Pure Pure x=k=k x Get k’=k=Get(k’≫k) Put x  k’=k=Put x (k’≫k) Again, a computation that tells the context and continues ask’and then ask, really continues ask’≫k.
In  MTL’s  Writer  monad,  the  told  value  must  have  aMonoid type. OurIT i ohas no such constraints. If we write aWriter-like ITinterpreter to accumulate the told values in a monoid, it will have theMonoid oconstraint then: runRdWriter::Monoid o⇒i→IT  i   o  a→(a, o) runRdWriter i  m=loop mempty m where loop  acc  (Pure x)=(x,acc) loop  acc  (Get k)=loop acc (k  i ) loop  acc  (Put o k)=loop (acc 8 mappend 8 o) (k ()) There are other ways of interpretingIT i o arequests, for example, keeping the last told value, or writing the told value tostderr. Yet another interpreter, ofIT s scomputation takes the told value as the one to give when next asked, thus treatingIT s sas aState computation.
TheIT i ocomputation is an extension ofIt i. Alas, data types are not extensible. Therefore, we had to change the data type name and hence modify (the signatures of)addGetandaddN, even if their code does not care about the new writer effect and remains essentially the same.
2.3    Free Monad A data type describing an effectful computation such asIt i aand IT i o afollows a common pattern: It is a recursive data type, with thePurevariant for the absence of any requests, and the variants for requests, usually containing the continuation that receives the reply  (except  for  exceptions  that  do  not  expect  any  reply).  The recursive occurrences of the data type are always as the return type of the continuations, that is, in covariant positions. This pattern, of pure and effectful parts and covariant recursive occurrences can be captured as dataFree  f  a=Pure a |Impure (f  (Free  f  a)) wherefis a (categorical) functor, that is, inf a, the typeaoccurs covariantly. The latter phrase means that if we can convert a value of typeainto some other value of typeb, we can also turnf ainto f b. TheFunctortype class captures that meaning literally: class   Functor  fwhere fmap::(a→b)→(f  a→f  b) The  concrete  instantiations  offdefine  the  types  of  requests  and replies, that is, the effect signature of a particular effectful compu- tation. This splitting of a recursive data type such asIt iinto a non- recursive “structure component” and the recursive tying the knot Free f awas pioneered in [28] (who also used extensible effectful interpreters as one of the examples).
2 In  Haskell,  this()acknowledgment  is  not  needed,  but  it  fits  our  story better.
 The monad instances forIt iandIT i oalso look very much alike.  It  is  a  shame  to  keep  writing  such  instances  for  each  new effect and each combination of effects. TheFree fdata type lets us capture the common pattern: instance   Functor  f⇒Monad(Free f)where return=Pure Pure a=k=k a Impure f=k=Impure (fmap (=k) f) ThusFree ffor  a  functorfis  a  monad  –  the  free  monad.  New effects  will  have  new  effect  signaturesf,  but  the  single  instance ofMonad(Free f)will work for all of them, with no further re- writing.
As  an  example,  the  earlierIT i ocomputation  may  now  be specified as dataReaderWriter i   o  x=Get (i→x)|Put o (()→x) instance   Functor  (ReaderWriter i   o)where...
typeIT  i   o  a=Free (ReaderWriter i   o)  a The word “free” in free monad refers to the category theory’s construction  of  the  left  adjoint  of  a  forgetful  operation  [2].  In English,  if  we  take  a  monad,  say,State swith  itsreturn,bind, fmap,putandgetoperations  and  forget  the  first  two,  we  can recover the monad asFree (State s), with prostheticreturnand bind. In short, we get theMonadinstance for free.
In  general  monads  do  not  compose:  ifM1 aandM2 aare monads,M1 (M2 a)is  generally  not.  Free  monads  however  are a  particular  form  of  monads,  defined  via  a  functor.  Functors  do compose. We will exploit that fact after one more generalization.
2.4    Free-er Monads Let us look more carefully at the Monad instance forFree f. The purpose  offmapthere  is  to  extend  the  continuation,  embedded somewhere within(f (Free f a)), by(≫)-composing it with the newk. The operationfmaplets us generically modify the embed- ded continuation, for any request signature.
Since the continuation argument is being handled so uniformly, it makes sense to take it out of the request signature and place it right into the fixed request data structure, as the second argument ofImpure: dataFFree f  awhere Pure::a→FFree f  a Impure::f  x→(x→FFree f  a)→FFree f  a The remaining part of the request signaturef xtells the typexof the reply, to be fed into the continuation. Different requests have their own reply types, hencexis existentially quantified. Our Reader- Writer effect gets then the following signature: dataFReaderWriter i  o  xwhere Get::FReaderWriter i  o  i Put::o→FReaderWriter i  o  () It is a GADT: the type variablexinFReaderWriter i o xis instan- tiated depending on the type of the request. ForGet, the reply type isi, and forPut, it is unit. TheIT i o ais now typeIT  i   o  a=FFree (FReaderWriter i  o)  a The monad instance forFFree fno longer needs theFunctoror any other constraint onf: instanceMonad(FFree f)where...
Impure fx  k’=k=Impure fx (k’≫k) FFree fis more satisfying since it abstracts more of the common pattern of accumulating continuation, compared toFree. It is more general, not imposing any constraints onf– it is “freer”. Continuing our example ofState sfrom the end of§2.3, we can now forget not  onlyreturnandbindbut  also  thefmapoperation,  and  still recover the state monad throughFFree (State s)construction. We no  longer  have  to  bother  defining  the  basic  monad  and  functor operations  in  the  first  place:  We  now  get  not  only  theMonad instance but also theFunctorandApplicativeinstances for free.
Freer  monad  is  also  more  economical  in  terms  of  memory (and running time) because the continuation can now be accessed directly rather than viafmap, which has to rebuild the mapped data structure. The explicit continuation ofFFreealso makes it easier to change its representation, which we will do in§3.
Marcelo Fiore has suggested in private communication that the above FFree construction is the left Kan extension. To highlight this point we show another derivation ofFFree. Recall, iff::∗→∗is a functor, we can convertf xtof awhenever we can mapxvalues toavalues. Ifg::∗→∗is not a functor, such a conversion is not possible. We can “cheat” however: although we cannot truly fmap h::x→aoverg x, we can keep its two operands as a pair, and assume the mapping as if it were performed: dataLan (g::∗ → ∗) awhere FMap::(x→a)→g  x→Lan g a Any further mapping overLan g aupdates the original mapping, leavingg xintact. That is,Lan gis now a “formal” functor: instance   Functor  (Lan g)where fmap h (FMap h’ gx)=FMap (h◦h’) gx ThisLanconstruction is the Left Kan extension. One may think of it as a free Haskell Functor – Functor by construction – just as a list is a free Monoid.
Let us see whatFree (Lan g)is: substitutingfin the type of (f (Free f a))→Free f aofFree.ImpurewithLan ggives us ∃x.   (x→(Free  (Lan g)  a))→g  x→Free  (Lan g)  a which is the type ofFFree.Impure. Hence typeFFRee g=Free (Lan g) Incidentally, the type-aligned sequences, which we will use in§3, are essentially Free-er Applicative.
By analogy with the “free functor”Lan gwe may also define a “free bifunctor” dataBiFree  p  a  bwhere Bimap::(a→b)→(c→d)→p  a  c→BiFree  p  b  d which is a generalization of the bifunctor used in [16,§6.3].
One  last  generalization  step  remains,  to  deliver  the  promised extensibility.
2.5    From Free(er) Monads to Extensible Effects We have hinted in§2.3 that the form of free monads, built from functors, lends itself to composability since functors compose. This section  demonstrates  this  composability  on  freer  monads,  built around  left  Kan  extensions,  which  are  functors  by  construction.
There are two sides to composability: extensible monad type and modular interpreters. The latter part has been receiving less atten- tion: for example, Data types ` a la carte [30] provides the former but not the latter.
A monad type is extensible if we can add a new effect without having  to  touch  or  even  recompile  the  old  code.  TheFree for FFree flets us do that: the monad type is indexed by the request signaturef. Specifying this signature as an ordinary data type, such asReaderWriterin§2.3 or GADTFReaderWriterin§2.4 is not extensible:  an  ordinary  variant  data  type  is  a  closed  union,  with the  fixed  number  of  variants.  Open  unions  are  relatively  easy  to construct, essentially by nesting the simplest union, the Either data type. The monad transformer paper [22] already showed such an implementation; Swierstra [30] used essentially the same.
We will use the open union that improves the previous imple- mentations, including the one in [21]. It provides the (abstract) type Union (r::[∗→∗]) xwhere the first argumentris a type-level list of effect labels, to be described shortly. The second argument is the response type, which depends on a particular request. The argu- mentrlists all effects that are possible in a computation; a concrete Union r xvalue contains one request out of those listed inr.
 It is crucial for extensibility to be able to talk about one effect without needing to list all others. For the sake of this effect poly- morphism, our implementation provides a type class class   Member t rwhere inj::t  v→Union r  v prj::Union r  v→Maybe (t v) that asserts that a labeltoccurs in the listr. If an effect is part of the union, its request can be injected and projected. We also offer another function, not present in [22, 30], to “orthogonally project” from the union, decomp::Union (t  ’:   r )  v→Either   (Union r  v)  (t  v) obtaining either a request labeledtor a smaller union, withoutt.
This  function  is  needed  for  effect  encapsulation.  The  earlier  ex- tensible effects library [21] provided a similar open union, imple- mented using overlapping instances and Typeable. The latter in par- ticular attracted a large number of complaints. Deriving Typeable is indeed an extra step for a library aiming to encourage using many custom  effects.  For  applications  like  monadic  regions,  Typeable was quite an obstacle, as we discuss in§7. The current implementa- tion uses neither overlapping, nor Typeable. It also does not provide the no longer needed Functor instance.
The extensible freer monad, the monad of extensible effects, is henceFFreewith the open union: dataFEFree r  awhere Pure::a→FEFree r  a Impure::Union r  x→(x→FEFree r  a)→FEFree r  a A request label defines a particular effect and its requests. For example, the Reader and Writer effects have the following labels: dataReader i   xwhere Get::Reader i   i dataWriter  o  xwhere Put::o→Writer  o  () Informally, we split the monolithicFReaderWriterrequest signa- ture into its components (to be combined in the open union). The simplestReadercomputation,askof§2.1, can now be written as ask::Member (Reader i) r⇒Eff   r  i ask=Impure (inj  Get)  return The  signature  tells  thataskis  anEff r icomputation  which  in- cludes theReader ieffect, without telling what other effects may be present. Unlike the oldaskof§2.1, the new one can be used,as it is, without any adjustments to code or the signature, in programs with other effects. The new ask is thus extensible.
Making  interpreters  such  asrunRdWriterof§2.2  modular  is just as important, and not always achieved in the past. We describe them§3.
2.6    Performance Problem of Free(er) Monads Free  (and  freer)  monads  are  certainly  elegant  and  insightful,  but poorly performing. Let us look again at theFFree fmonad instance instanceMonad(FFree f)where...
Impure fx  k’=k=Impure fx (k’≫k) The  bind  operation  traverses  its  left  argument  but  merely  passes around  the  right  argument.  Therefore,  the  performance  of  left- associated  binds,  like  the  performance  of  left-associated  list  ap- pends, will be poor – algorithmically poor. For example, the run- ning time ofaddN n, implemented either as theIt imonad or the FEFree [Reader i]monad, is quadratic inn. This is becauseaddN happens  to  associateaddGets  on  the  left.  For  example,addN 3 evaluates to ((( return≫addGet)≫addGet)≫addGet) 0 which takes 3 evaluation steps to (( Impure (inj   Get)  return◦(+0))=addGet)=addGet The two evaluations of bind then produce the final request Impure (inj   Get)  (( return◦(+0)≫addGet x)≫addGet) The continuation, the second argument toImpure, is theaddGet chain  we  started  with,  only  one  link  shorter.  Processing  the  re- ply from the context will again take time linear in the size of the chain. Overall, processingnrequests takesO(n 2 )time. We refer the reader to [31] for more illustration and discussion of this per- formance problem, and for the general solution: representing the continuation as an efficient data structure, a type-aligned sequence.
3.    Final Result: Freer and Better ExtensibleEff Monad This section describes our current, improved and efficient library of extensible effects. Thanks to the Freer monad and the new open union it became easier, compared to the version presented two years ago [21], to define a new effect and to write a handler for it. There is no longer any need for Functor and Typeable instances. The perfor- mance has also improved, algorithmically; see§3.3. Before show- ing off the library in§3.2 we describe the last key improvement, representing the continuation as an efficient data structure.
3.1    Composed Continuation as a Data Structure The  new  library  is  based  on  theFEFreemonad  derived  in§2.5 (repeated here for reference): dataFEFree r  awhere Pure::a→FEFree r  a Impure::Union r  x→(x→FEFree r  a)→FEFree r  a differing  in  one  final  respect:  Now  that  the  request  continuation x→FEFree r ais  exposed,  it  can  be  represented  in  other  ways than just a function. The motivation for a new representation comes from looking at the monad instance forFEFree f instanceMonad(FFree f)where...
Impure fx  k’=k=Impure fx (k’≫k) which extends the request continuationk’with the new segment k. The lesson of [31] is to represent thisconceptualsequence of extending  the  continuation  with  more  and  more  segments  as  a concrete sequence. It would contain all the segments that should be functionally composed – without actually composing them! We shall see soon that the composing is not really needed: it was just a way of accumulating continuation segments, and not an efficient way at that. (Another motivation to look for a new representation of continuations is the performance problem of free(er) monads, described in§2.6).
We call the improvedFEFree rmonadEff r, wherer, as in§2.5, is the list of effect labels. The request continuation – which receives the replyxand works towards the final answera– then has the type x→Eff r a. We define the convenient type abbreviation for such effectful functions, that is, functions mappingatobthat also do effects denoted byr.
typeArr  r  a  b=a→Eff  r  b The job of the monad bind is to accumulate the request contin- uation, by(≫)-composing it with further and furtherArr r a b segments. Rather than really doing the composition, we assume it as performed, and merely accumulate the pieces being composed in a data structure. The left Kan extension used the same ‘pretend the operation performed’ trick. The data structure has to be hetero- geneous, actually, type-aligned [31]: theArr r a bbeing composed have differentaandbtypes, and the result type of one function must  match  the  argument  type  of  the  next.  The  type-aligned  se- quences enforce this invariant by construction. We chose the se- quenceFTCQueueof the following interface typeFTCQueue (m::∗→∗) a b tsingleton::(a→m b)→FTCQueue m a b (B)::FTCQueue m a x→(x→m b)→FTCQueue m a b 
(BC)::FTCQueue m a x→FTCQueue m x b→FTCQueue m a b dataViewL m a bwhere TOne::(a→m b)→ViewL m a b (:|)::(a→m x)→(FTCQueue m x b)→ViewL m a b tviewl::FTCQueue m a b→ViewL m a b FTCQueue m a brepresents the composition of one or more func- tions of the general shapea→m b. The operationtsingletoncon- structs a one-element sequence,(B)adds a new element at the right edge and(BC)concatenates two sequences;tviewlremoves the element from the left edge. All operations have constant or aver- age  constant  running  time.  OurFTCQueuemay  be  regarded  as the minimalistic version of a more general fast type-aligned queue FastTCQueue: see [31] andtype-alignedon Hackage. Thus the composition  of  functions  (continuation  segments)a→Eff r t1, t1→Eff r t2, . . . ,tn→Eff r bis represented as typeArrs  r  a  b=FTCQueue (Eff r) a b and theEff rmonad has the following form dataEff   r  awhere Pure::a→Eff   r  a Impure::Union r  x→Arrs  r  x  a→Eff   r  a A composition of functions is a function itself; likewiseArrs r a b is isomorphic to the singleArr r a b(ora→Eff r b). In one di- rection, singleK::Arr  r  a  b→Arrs  r  a  b singleK=tsingleton the conversion builds the sequence with one element. In the other direction, qApp::Arrs  r  b  w→b→Eff   r  w qApp q x=case tviewl  q  of TOne k→k  x k  :|t→bind’   (k  x)  t wherebind’::Eff   r  a→Arrs  r  a  b→Eff   r  b bind’   (Pure y)  k=qApp k y bind’   (Impure u q)  k=Impure u (qBCk) TheqAppoperation  applies  the  argumentxto  a  composition  of functions  denoted  by  the  sequenceArrs r a b.  To  be  precise,  it appliesxto  the  head  of  the  sequencekand  ‘tacks  in’  the  tailt (if any) as it was. That is the performance advantage of the new representation for continuation. Thebind’operation is like monad bind(=)but with the continuation represented as the sequence Arrs r a brather than thea→Eff r bfunction. If the application k xruns in constant time, the wholeqApp q xtakes on average constant time.
Finally, in the monad instance ofEff r instanceMonad(Eff r)where return=Pure Pure x=k=k x Impure u q=k=Impure u (qBk) the bind operation grows the sequenceArrs r x aof continuations by appending another segment,k, which takes constant time.
3.2    Library Showcase: Defining and Interpreting Effects We  now  demonstrate  the  extensible  effects  library:  writing  and composing effectful computations with theEffmonad. We re-do the reader and writer example§2.1,§2.2 to show that now adding the writer does not have to change the earlier code.
An effect is defined first by listing its requests and the corre- sponding reply types. For theReader ieffect, the request merely asks for a reply of the typei.
dataReader i   xwhere Get::Reader i   i The simplest client that returns the received reply is hence ask::Member (Reader i) r⇒Eff   r  i ask=Impure (inj  Get)  (tsingleton    Pure) Recall,tsingletoncreates  the  singleton  sequence.  The  following library function makes the sending of requests even easier: send::Member t r⇒t  v→Eff   r  v send  t=Impure (inj  t )  (tsingleton    Pure) The  otherReadercomputationsaddGetandaddNof§2.1  are expressed in terms ofaskand monad operations; their code is hence unchanged. Here they are, for the ease of reference: addGet::Member (Reader Int) r⇒Int→Eff   r  Int addGet x=ask=\i→return   (i+x) addN::Member (Reader Int) r⇒Int→Eff   r  Int addN n=foldl  (≫) return   (replicaten  addGet) 0 Their types however become more general:addN nhas theReader effectandcan be used in computations that do other effects.
Interpreters ofReaderrequests now have to keep in mind there may be other request types, for other interpreters to deal with. Here is the new version ofrunReaderfrom§2.1: runReader::i→Eff   (Reader i   ’:   r )  a→Eff   r  a runReader i  m=loop mwhere loop  (Pure x)=return  x loop  (Impure u q)=case decomp u of Right  Get→loop$qApp q i Leftu→Impure u (tsingleton    (qComp q loop)) The type signature says thatrunReader ireceives theEffcomputa- tion with theReader ieffect, and returns theEffcomputation with- out. TheReader ieffect is thus handled, or encapsulated. The code indeed replies to theGetrequest – leaving other requests for other interpreters, see theLeft ucase. After that other interpreter replies, the program resumes and may make furtherGetrequests. That is why we append the reader interpreterloopto the reply continuation q, using the functionqComp: qComp::Arrs  r  a  b→(Eff   r  b→Eff   r ’   c)→Arr  r ’   a  c qComp g h=h◦qApp g The result continuation has the different list of effect labelsr’since some of the effects will be handled by the interpreterh.
The common request handling code is factored out in the fol- lowing function provided by the library: handle relay::(a→Eff   r  w)→ (∀v.   t  v→Arr  r  v  w→Eff  r  w)→ Eff   (t  ’:   r )  a→Eff   r  w handle relay    ret(Pure x)=ret  x handle relay    ret   h  (Impure u q)=case decomp u of Right  x→h  x  k Leftu→Impure u (tsingleton    k) wherek=qComp q (handlerelay ret  h) The first two arguments ofhandle relayare likereturnandbind.
The reader interpreter can be thus written simply as runReader i=handlerelay   return   (\Get k→k  i ) The last part ofhandlerelay’s signature,Eff (t ’: r) a→Eff r w, shows that the labeltof the handled effect must be at the top of the list of effect labelsr. Whereas effectful functions likeaddNabove orrdwrbelow regardrtruly as a set of effect labels, with no particu- lar order, handlers impose the order. This fact is noticeable already in the interface ofUnionin§2.5: in the signatures ofinjandprj, effects are represented by the type variabler, with aMembercon- straint. On the other hand,decomptakes the collection of effects to be specifically a list, with the projected effecttat its head. In our experience so far, this imposition of order by the handlers has not been a problem. It is theoretically unsatisfying. Although we could avoid it by playing with Constraint types, the required type anno- tations made the result impractical. Unfortunately, there does not seem to be any convenient way in Haskell to discharge one type class constraint by submitting the corresponding dictionary. (Im- plicit parameters do come very close.) To run theEffcomputation after all effects have been handled by the corresponding interpreters, the library provides run::Eff   ’[]    a→a run  (Pure x)=x 
TheImpurecase  is  unreachable  sinceUnion ’[] ahas  no  (non- bottom) values. Thus we runaddGet 1as run◦runReader 10$addGet 1 Let us add the writer effect, of telling the context the value of typeo: dataWriter  o  xwhere Put::o→Writer  o  () tell::Member (Writer o) r⇒o→Eff   r  () tello=send$Put o The type oftelllets it be combined in any effectful computation with theWriter oeffect. Here is a sample combined reader-writer computation −−rdwr::(Member (Reader Int) r,  Member (Writer String) r ) −− ⇒Eff   r  Int rdwr=do{tell   ”begin”;  r←addN 10; tell    ”end”;  return   r} whose inferred type is shown in the comments. Because the type ofaddNis polymorphic inr, we could useaddNas it was in a computation with more effects (and similarly, fortell).
In§2.2, the interpreter for Reader-Writer computations was the monolithicrunRdWriter,  which  handled  both  types  of  requests.
Now we can interpret only theWriterrequests runWriter::Eff   (Writer  o  ’:   r )  a→Eff   r  (a,[ o]) runWriter= handle relay    (\x→return   (x,[])) (\( Put o)  k→k  ()=\(x,l )→return   (x, o: l )) and literally compose it with the previously writtenrunReader. The sample reader-writer computationrdwris thus run as (run◦runReader 10◦runWriter) rdwr Since the reader and writer effects commute, the order of the inter- preters can be switched without affecting the result.
One may write other reader and writer interpreters, for example, handling Reader and Writer requests together; the value last told becomes  the  value  to  give  on  the  next  Reader  request.  We  thus implementState, by decomposing it into the reading and mutating parts. It becomes easier to tell, just from their inferred type, which parts of the computation mutate the state.
runStateR::Eff   (Writer  s  ’:   Reader s  ’:   r )  w→s→Eff   r  (w,s) runStateR m s=loop s mwhere loop::s→Eff   (Writer  s  ’:   Reader s  ’:   r )  w→Eff  r  (w,s) loop  s  (Pure x)=return  (x, s) loop  s  (Impure u q)=case decomp u of Right  (Put o)→k  o  () Leftu→case  decomp u of Right  Get→k  s  s Left  u→Impure u (tsingleton    (k  s)) wherek s=qComp q (loop s) 3.3    Improved Performance This section re-analyzes the performance of the freer monad after changing  the  representation  of  the  request  continuation,  on  the problematic example from§2.6. As before,addN 3evaluates to ((( return≫addGet)≫addGet)≫addGet) 0 and then to (( Impure (inj   Get)  [ return◦(+0)])=addGet)=addGet The two evaluations of bind produce the request Impure (inj   Get)  [ return   (+0), addGet, addGet] (where we used the list notation for the type-aligned sequence for clarity). So far, the process and its result seem similar to that for the non-optimized monad in§2.5. The fact that the continuation of theGetrequest is now represented as an efficient sequence makes the difference. When arunReaderinterpreter replies, say, with the valuev1, it does the following operations that eventually produce a new request. For emphasis we denote astthe tail of the request continuation (in our example,tis the singleton sequence[addGet]): qApp (return  (+0) :  addGet :  t )  v1  return   v1 8 bind’ 8 (addGet :  t )  addGet v1 8 bind’ 8 t  Impure (inj   Get)  (return   (+v1) :  t ) The above reduction sequence has dealt only with the two head el- ements of the entire continuation of the original request. The tailt was merely passed around and not even looked at. Furthermore, all FTCQueueoperations involvingtsuch as concatenation, etc., were constant-time. Therefore, the entire sequence of reductions above runs in time independent of the length oft. The run-time of the entireaddN ncomputation is thus linear inn. Compared with the previous version§2.5, we obtain the algorithmic improvement in performance, from quadratic to linear. The key to the performance is the ability to look at and remove initial segments from the accu- mulated request continuation. If the continuation is represented as a composition of functions, we cannot ‘uncompose‘ them – but we can deconstruct a data structure.
4.    Performance Evaluation This section reports on several micro-benchmarks used to evaluate the performance of extensible effects (EE) relative to monad trans- former library MTL, Kammar’s et al. “Handlers in action (HIA)” [17] and the old version of EE presented in [21].
The benchmark code was compiled with GHC 7.8.3 with the flag−threaded−O−rtsopts. We ran the benchmark on an Intel Core i7 (2.8GHz) laptop with 16GB of RAM. The Criterion frame- work was used to report the run-time.
4.1    Deep-monad-stack Benchmarks First, we ran two benchmark computations with many effects (deep monad stacks). These benchmarks do a simple stateful computation with manyReaderlayers under or over the targetStatelayer. The coreStatecomputation is as follows: benchS ns=foldM f 1 nswhere f  acc  x|x 8 mod 8 5==0=do s←get put$!(s+1::Integer) return$!max acc x f  acc  x=return$!max acc x Strictness annotations are to avoid space leaks.
Figure 1 shows the results. If we add the extraReaderlayers undertheState(the top of Fig.1), EE runs in constant time, while the MTL version takes linear time in the number of layers. Our EE is about 12% faster than HIA, and 40% faster than the old EE. If theStatelayer  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  monad  stack  (the  bottom of  Fig.1)  the  run-time  of  HIA  and  EE  versions  is  linear  in  the number of layers, whereas MTL and the old EE are quadratic. The results confirm the analyzes of performance in§2.6 and§3.3: the EE library presented in this paper indeed algorithmically improves the performance over the old version – as well over MTL for deep monad stacks. The overhead of MTL can indeed be severe for deep stacks. We also see that EE is competitive with HIA.
4.1.1    Monad Stack Depth and Memory Consumption We also evaluated the memory efficiency of the two deep-monad- stack benchmarks by taking the memory profile, using GHC with RTS options−N2−prof−p−N2−p−hm. Figure 2 shows the result.
AddingReaderlayers under theStatelayer (the top of Fig.2) affects the memory consumption of effect libraries (EE and HIA) very little. The memory use does increase linearly with the number of layers, but by such a small amount that it is very difficult to see in the figure. In contrast, the amount of allocated memory for MTL is quadratic in the number of layers, and is quite large compared to the effect libraries. If we addReaderover theStatelayer (the 
01234 1 1.5 2 # ofReaderlayersundertheState Time (sec) Statelayer at the top MTL HIA Old EE EE Inlined EE 02468 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 # ofReaderlayersoverState Time (sec) Statelayer at the bottom MTL HIA Old EE EE Inlined EE Figure  1.Runtime  in  seconds  for  MTL,  HIA,  Old  EE,  EE  and Inlined  EE.x-axis  corresponds  to  the  number  ofReaderlayers under(top) orover(bottom) the targetStatelayer.
bottom of Fig.2), the linear increase in allocated memory for effect libraries becomes quite more noticeable. The MTL memory use is again quadratic in the number of layers. The results confirm our expectation of the memory efficiency of the EE library presented in this paper.
4.2    Single-effect Benchmark We have just seen that EE can overcome the overhead of handling very many effects. To see how EE and MTL compare for a single effect, we ran a simpler benchmark, with the singleStateor the singleErroreffect (table 1).
Table 1.A simple benchmark with a single layer (msec).
pureMTLHIAOld EEEEInlined EE State-15.27.16840579488 Error46.4218648644204216 12345 2 2.5 3 ·10 5 # ofReaderlayersundertheState Total alloc (bytes) Statelayer at the top MTL HIA Old EE EE Inlined EE 1234567 2 3 4 ·10 5 # ofReaderlayersoverState Total alloc (bytes) Statelayer at the bottom MTL HIA Old EE EE Inlined EE Figure 2.Total allocation in10 5 bytes for MTL, HIA, Old EE, EE and Inlined EE.x-axis corresponds to the number ofReaderlayers under(top) orover(bottom) the targetStatelayer.
The  singleStatebenchmark  counts  down  from10,000,000 to0,  using  theStatemonad.  The  EE  version  is  much  slower than  the  MTL  and  HIA,  30  and  60  times  correspondingly.  This is  because  theStatemonad  enjoys  the  preferential  treatment  by GHC, with dedicated optimization passes. Likewise, GHC is very good at optimizing simple CPS code employed in simple instances of HIA. Thus for the singleStateeffect, our EE approach is not so suitable. The new library is still noticeably faster than the original EE version two years ago.
In  contrast,  for  theErrormonad  EE  and  MTL  have  almost the  same  performance  and  notably,  three  times,  faster  than  HIA and the old approach. TheErrorbenchmark takes the product of 10,000,000copies of1and0, raising a exception when the zero factor is found.
Thus for the single or few-layered monadic computations, EE can compete with individual single specialized monads in general, but for some monads, likeState, it runs much more slowly.
 50100150200 0 2 4 6 Search Range Time (sec) Simple Pythagorean Triples Search MTL HIA Old EE EE Inlined EE 50100150200 0 5 10 Search Range Time (sec) Pythagorean Triples Search with Counting MTL HIA Old EE EE Inlined EE Figure  3.Runtime  in  seconds  for  MTL,  HIA,  Old  EE,  EE  and Inlined EE.x-axis corresponds to the search range for Pythagorean triples.
4.3    Non-determinism Benchmarks We have run another series of benchmarks, for the non-determinism effect, to be discussed in detail in§5.
The first benchmark (the top of Fig.3) searches for Pythagorean triples up to the given bound with non-deterministic brute-force: iota   k  n=ifk>nthenmzeroelsereturn   k 8 mplus 8 iota   (k+1) n pyth1::MonadPlus m⇒Int→m (Int,  Int ,   Int ) pyth1  upbound=do x←iota   1  upbound y←iota   1  upbound z←iota   1  upbound ifx∗x+y∗y==z∗zthenreturn (x,y,z)elsemzero For the MTL version, we use the continuation monad transformer ContT. The result shows that our EE is much faster than old EE, but slightly slower than MTL and HIA. We should stress that our EE library, unlike HIA and MTL, implements the more general LogicT effect: non-determinism with committed choice.
The next benchmark adds to the previous one counting of the all attempted choices, using theStateeffect. The result at the bottom of  Figure  3  shows  that  our  EE  approach  is  faster  than  the  other alternatives.
The results confirm the good performance of EE, also for more complicated computations with many layers of effects.
4.4    Comparison with “Fusion for Free” Very recently, Wu and Schrijvers [32] introduced the “Fusion for Free” approach for algebraic event handlers. Since their implemen- tation is not yet published as a library, we will briefly compare per- formance in a qualitative manner. Specifically, we ran the bench- markscount 1andcount2from [32] for MTL, EE and Inlined EE. The result is shown in Table 2.
Table 2.Runtime in milliseconds for Counting benchmarks from Wu and Schrijvers [32] MTLEEInlined count110 3 0.0006940.05920.0488 10 4 0.006920.5930.489 10 5 0.06895.874.81 count210 3 0.2020.3060.287 (Writer10 4 4.846.406.51 bottom)10 5 54.484.780.8 count 210 3 0.08590.3450.316 (Writer10 4 2.856.576.67 top)10 5 37.385.284.2 Here,count 1is the singleState-effect benchmark, counting down in theStatemonad, similar to our benchmark in§4.2. This is the singular most unfavorable case for EE compared to MTL, since  GHC  has  several  optimizations  that  benefit  the  MTL  State monad. The table shows that in all the cases, the run-time increases with the count not just linearly but proportionally. This qualitatively reproduces the behavior reported by Wu and Schrijvers in [32].
The  nextcount 2benchmark  counts  down  usingState,  and also logs every intermediate value in theWritermonad. Wu and Schrijvers did not indicate which layer is on top, so we ran both cases, which proved to make little difference for EE (in contrast to MTL, however). The run-times again seem linear, but not propor- tional. In [32], the run-time of “Fusion” is proportional. Although the qualitative behavior again seems similar, quantitative compari- son is clearly needed. We defer it to future work, when the code for [32] becomes available.
4.5    Inlining of Key Functions The key functions of the EE library such ashandledescribed in §3,  contain  a  recursive  reference  but  not  a  recursive  invocation.
These  functions  are  hence  safe  to  inline.  To  see  if  it  makes  any difference we added theINLINEABLEpragma for these functions.
The pragma had almost no effect. The performance has improved slightly  only  when  we  inlinedtviewlintoqAppby  hand  (these functions are defined in different modules).
5.    Non-determinism with Committed Choice Non-determinism, with its inherent balancing of several continu- ations, may seem impossible to express as a freer monad, which explicitly deals with a single continuation. This section shows that not only theEffmonad can represent non-deterministic choice, but 
also that the representation preserves the sharing of continuations, lost in the standard free monad approach.
Free monad models non-determinism with the following request functor: dataNdet x=MZero|MPlus x x instance   Functor  Ndetwhere...
MZero, like an exception, requests abandoning the current line of computation  as  unsuccessful;MPlusasks  the  context  to  choose between the twoNdetcomputations. This request signature comes straight  from  the  interface  for  non-deterministic  computations  in Haskell:MonadPlusorAlternative: instance   MonadPlus (Free Ndet)where mzero=Impure MZero mplus m1 m2=Impure$MPlus m1 m2 TheMPlusconstructor has two continuation arguments. How are we going to separate them into the single continuation argument ofFFree? Let us consider the non-deterministic choice in context: (mplus m1 m2=k1)=k2 {The bind of  the  Free  monad}  Impure (fmap (=k1) (MPlus m1 m2)=k2 {The fmap from the derived Functor  instance}  Impure (MPlus (m1=k1) (m2=k1))=k2 {Repeating for   k2}  Impure (MPlus ((m1=k1)=k2) ((m2=k1)=k2)) That is, the two continuations collected byMPlusin fact have the commonk1,k2suffix. That suffix, albeit common, is not shared: although the two MPlus continuations share the common segments, they are independently composed. It is this common suffix that the freer monad will factor out and share.
After  the  common  continuation  suffix  is  separated  out,  what remains ofMPlusis the request to the context to pick and return one  of  the  two  choices.  There  is  no  need  to  include  the  choices themselves  in  the  request  then.  Hence  in  theEffframework,  the non-determinism effect has the following signature: dataNdetEff  awhere MZero::NdetEff  a MPlus::NdetEff  Bool instance   Member NdetEff r⇒MonadPlus (Eff r)where mzero=send MZero mplus m1 m2=send MPlus=\x→ifxthenm1elsem2 To complete the implementation, we add an interpreter, such as the following, mapping theNdetEff-effect non-determinism to Alter- native: makeChoiceA::Alternative    f⇒ Eff   (NdetEff  ’:   r )  a→Eff   r  (f  a) makeChoiceA=handle relay (return◦pure)$\m k→case m of MZero→return empty MPlus→liftM2  (<|>) (k True) (k False) One may recognize in this code the “flip oracle” of [9,§3], which non-deterministically returns a boolean value. Just as Danvy and Filinski’s code, we are capturing the context ofmplus, represented askabove, and plugging firstTrueand thenFalseinto the very same context.
The advantage ofNdetEffover Alternative is not only the ability to mixNdetEffwith other (non-applicative) effects, for example, State. It also supports the so-called “committed choice” [25], such as logical “if-then-else” (called “soft-cut” in Prolog): ifte::Member NdetEff r⇒ Eff   r  a→(a→Eff   r  b)→Eff   r  b→Eff   r  b Declaratively,ifte t th elis  equivalent  tot=thif  the  non- deterministic  computationtsucceeds  at  least  once.  Otherwise, ifte t th elis equivalent toel. The difference betweenifte t th el and the seemingly equivalent(t=th) 8 mplus 8 elis that in the lat- terelis a valid choice even iftsucceeds. In the former,elis chosen if and only iftis the total failure. One of the examples ofifteis the manyparser combinator with ‘maximal munch’:many pshould keep  applying  the  argument  parserpfor  as  long  as  it  succeeds.
The following is another, easier to explain albeit more contrived, example: computing primes test ifte=do n←gen ifte    (dod←gen guard$d<n  && n 8 mod 8 d==0) (\ →mzero) (return   n) wheregen=msum◦fmap return$[2..30] msum::MonadPlus m⇒[m a]→m a−−choose one from a list Heregennon-deterministically produces a candidate prime and a candidate divisor. The prime candidate is accepted if all attempts to divide it fail. For example, test ifterun::[ Int ] testifterun=run◦makeChoiceA$testifte −−[2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,23,29] gives the result shown in the comment.
We actually implement not justiftebut the general msplit::Member NdetEff r⇒ Eff   r  a→Eff   r  (Maybe (a, Eff  r  a)) which expresses all other committed choice operations [20]. One may think ofmsplitas “inspecting” the argument computation, to see if it can succeed. If a computation gives an answer, it is returned along with the computation that may produce further answers. The implementation is so straightforward and small that it can be listed in its entirety: msplit=loop []where loop  jq  (Pure x)=return  (Just(x,   msum jq)) loop  jq  (Impure u q)=case prj   u  of −−The current choice fails    (requested  abort) JustMZero→case jq  of −−check if there  are  other  choices []→returnNothing (j : jq )→loop  jq  j JustMPlus→loop ((qApp q False): jq )  (qApp q True) →Impure u (tsingleton    k)wherek=qComp q (loop jq) In words,msplit tintercepts theNdetEffrequests oft. Iftasks to  choose,MPlus,  one  choice  is  pursued  immediately  and  the other is saved in the work listjqof possible choices. The function finishes when the watched computation succeeds (the worklist is the collection of the remaining choices then) or when all possible choices failed.
We have demonstrated the most straightforwardEffimplemen- tation of not just non-determinism but non-determinism with com- mitted choice (or, LogicT) [20].
6.    Catching IO Exceptions Handling  IO  errors  in  the  presence  of  other  effects  abounds  in subtleties. It was also thought to be a challenge for theEfflibrary.
Not  only  hasEffmet  the  challenge,  it  improves  on  MTL.  With extensible effects, the state of the computation at the point of an exception is available to the handler. In MTL, an exception handler only has access to the state that existed at the point where it was installed (that is,catchwas entered). Any further changes, up to the point of the exception, are lost.
Capturing IO errors in generalMonadIOcomputations (not just the  bareIOmonad)  has  been  a  fairly  frequently  requested  fea- ture, going back to 2003 3
. An early approach 4 has been improved 3 http://www.haskell.org/pipermail/glasgow-haskell-users/ 2003-September/005660.html http://haskell.org/pipermail/ libraries/2003-February/000774.html 4 http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/misc.html#catch-MonadIO 
and polished through many packages (such as MonadCatchIO) and eventually de facto standardized inexceptions. The solution, al- though very useful in many circumstances is not without problems.
For example, consider the following computation with the Writer and IO effects dotell    ”begin”;  r←faultyFn ;   tell”end”;  return   r 8 catch 8 (\e→return◦show$(e::SomeException)) wherefaultyFnthrows an IO or a user-defined dynamic exception.
With  MTL,  any  Writer  updates  that  happened  aftercatchup  to the  point of  the exception  are lost.  That is,  after  the above  code finishes the accumulated trace has neither “end” nor “begin”. Such a  transactional  semantics  is  useful  –  but  not  when  the  Writer  is meant to accumulate the debug trace. Alas, MTL does not give us the easy choice.
To understand the MTL behavior, recall that itsWriterT String IO a monad  isIO (a,String):  it  is  the  computation  that  produces  the valueaalong with the contribution to the writer string. The catch is implemented as (seeliftCatchinmtl).
catch  h  m=m 8 IO.catch 8 \e→h e When an IO exception is raised, the value produced bym, including its Writer contribution, is lost. MTL’sliftCatchfor the State monad has the similar behavior of discarding the state accumulated since the catch is entered. In general, effect interaction in MTL depends on  the  order  of  the  transformer  layers;  the  IO  monad  is  not  a transformer however and must always be at the bottom of the stack.
If we execute the same code with the extensible-effect IO error handling 5 the  trace  accumulated  by  the  writer  of  course  has  no ”end”but it does have”begin”. Here is the whole code for catching IO exceptions catchDynE::∀e  a  r .
(MemberU2 Lift (Lift  IO)  r ,   Exc.Exception  e)⇒ Eff   r  a→(e→Eff   r  a)→Eff   r  a catchDynE m eh=interpose return h m where h::Lift   IO v→Arr  r  v  a→Eff   r  a h  (Lift   em) k=lift   (Exc.try   em)=\x→case x  of Right  x→k  x Lefte→eh  e In the extensible effects library, IO computations are requested with theLift IOeffect newtype Lift   m a=Lift  (m a) whose interpreter runLift::Monadm⇒Eff ’[Lift   m] w→m w is  necessarily  the  last  one,  which  is  signified  by  the  special MemberU2 Lift (Lift IO) rconstraint. The library functioninterpose is a version ofhandle relaythat does not consider an effect handled although it does reply to its requests:interposemay also ‘re-throw’ effect’s  request.  The  functioncatchDynEintercepts  IO  requests to wrap them into theException.tryto reify possible exceptions.
Therefore, IO errors are instantly caught and do not immediately discard their continuation. The effect handlers in scope and their state are thus preserved.
We can also easily implement transactional behavior: an excep- tion rolling-back the state to what it was when the exception han- dler was installed; see the source code for details.
7.    Regions Monadic Regions were introduced by Fluet and Morrisett [10] as a surprisingly simple version of the type-safe region memory man- agement system. It may be thought of as a nestedSTmonad while also allowing reference cells allocated in a parent region to be used, 5 http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/extensible/EffDynCatch.hs relatively hassle-free, in any child region. Lightweight monadic re- gions [19] is the Haskell implementation of the extended version of Fluet and Morrisett’s system, which was applied to IO resources such as file handles rather than memory cells, and is simpler to use.
Lightweight regions statically ensure that every accessible file han- dle is open, while providing timely closing. The original Monadic Regions used an atomic monad, indexed by a unique region name; the  lightweight  version  was  built  by  iterating  anST-like  monad transformer. Extensible effects, with its atomicEffmonad indexed by effects tempted one to re-implement lightweight regions closer to Fluet and Morrisett’s original style while still avoiding the in- convenience of passing around parent-child–relationship witnesses.
This challenge was set as future work in [21].
Implementing monadic regions with extensible effects was cer- tainly  a  challenge.  To  ensure  that  an  allocated  resource  such  as a  memory  cell  or  a  file  handle  do  not  escape  from  their  region, Monadic  Regions  –  like  theST smonad   –  mark  the  types  of the  computation  and  its  resources  with  a  quantified  (or  rigid,  in GHC parlance) type variable. DefiningTypeableinstances for such types was the first challenge. More worrisome, any type-level pro- gramming with types that include rigid variables never meant to be instantiated is fragile. Sometimes, incoherent instances [5] are needed,  which  is  a  rather  worrisome  extension  that  we  are  keen to avoid. Finally, lightweight monadic regions, although based on monad transformers, intentionally prohibited any lifting and hence the addition of other effects. Exceptions and non-determinism are clearly incompatible with the region discipline. On the other hand, State and Reader are benign and should be allowed.
All  these  challenges  have  been  met 6
.  Below  we  describe  the salient points of the implementation.
Since  the  new  version  of  extensible  effects  no  longer  uses Typeable, the first challenge disappears. The second one was dif- ficult  indeed.  The  most  straightforward  realization  of  Fluet  and Morrisett’s idea is to provide aRegionEff seffect indexed by the rigid type variablestaken to be the name of the region. File handles allocated within the region will be marked by that region’s name: newtype SHandle s=SHandle Handle dataRegionEff  s  awhere RENew::FilePath→IOMode→RegionEff s (SHandle s) The data constructors are private and not exported. (The actual im- plementation is a bit more complex because it supports bequeathing of file handles to an ancestor region, see [19] for more discussion.) The operation to allocate the new file handle will send aRENew request and obtain the handle marked with the region’s name.
newSHandle::Member (RegionEff s) r⇒ −−simplified FilePath→IOMode→Eff r (SHandle s) newSHandle fname fmode=send (RENew fname fmode) The list of constraints is a bit simplified, omitting the type-level computation that scans the list of effect labelsrand finds the name of  the  closest,  that  is,  innermost,  region.  The  interpreter  of  the requests newRgn::(∀s.   Eff   (RegionEff  s  ’:   r )  a)→Eff   r  a likerunST, has higher-rank type: informally, it allocates a fresh rigid type variables, the fresh name for the region. The interpreter keeps the list of handles it was asked to allocate, closing all of them upon normal or exceptional exit. An operation using the handle has the type shGetLine::Member (RegionEff s) r⇒ SHandle s→Eff   r  String that enforces that the region namedsowning the handle is active: its name is among the current effect labelsr. Incidentally, the signature 6 http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/extensible/EffRegion.hs http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/extensible/EffRegionTest.hs 
automaticallyallows the handle allocated in any ancestor region to be used in a child region.
The outlined implementation indeed works, save for two sub- tleties.  It  is  indeed  tempting  to  think  of  the  rigid  type  variable sas  the  name  for  the  regionRegionEff s.  Alas,  the  ever-present Member (RegionEff s) rconstraint, checking that theRegionEff s effect is part of the current effect listr, cannot distinguish two types RegionEff s1andRegionEff s2that differ only in the rigid type variable.  Although  these  variables  will  never  be  instantiated  and hence never can be the same, the constraint-solving part of GHC does not know or understand this fact. Therefore, we have to give regions another name, a type-level numeral, which the constraint- solver  can  distinguish.  Therefore,  the  signatures  ofnewSHandle andnewRgn(but  notshGetline,  etc)  are  slightly  more  complex than shown.
The second subtlety is allowing other effects besidesRegionEff.
Since  all  possible  effects  of  aEff rcomputation  are  listed  in r,  we  merely  need  to  look  through  the  list  to  check  if  the  ef- fect  is  known  to  be  benign.  The  implementation  provides  such SafeForRegionconstraint,  treatingReaderandStateas  safe 7
.
Exc SomeExceptionis  also  allowed  sincenewRgnspecifically listens for this request.
The rest of the implementation is straightforward. It passes the old Lightweight Regions regression tests with minimal modifica- tions.
8.    Related Work The library of extensible effects reported in this paper is the sim- plification and improvement of the library presented two years ago [21].Effwas a co-density-transformed free monad – which was not made clear in that paper. The co-density transform is regarded as an optimization – alas, it does not work for modular interpreters, which  have  to  reflect  the  continuation  when  relaying  a  request to another handler. The incompatibility of reflection with the co- density optimization was described in detail in [31]. We now use the simpler and quite better performing Freer monad with type-aligned sequences. The newEffalso uses the new implementation of open unions without the objectionable features:Typeableand overlap- ping instances. The applications described in§§5,6,7 are also new, for extensible effects.
One  of  the  most  common  questions  about  Extensible  Effects is their relation to Swierstra’s well-known “Data types ` a la carte” [30].  Similarities  are  indeed  striking:  free  monads,  open  unions, ‘modular’ monads leading to a type-and-effect system. Although the ` a la carte approach provides extensible monad type, it does not provide modular interpreters with modular effects and hence effect encapsulation.  Related  to  the  lack  of  compositionality  are  prob- lems with type inference, requiring cumbersome and what should be  unnecessary  annotations.  (The  ambiguity  in  the  definition  of the subsumption relation on collection of types, which caused the inference  problems,  has  been  rooted  out  in  the  novel  approach by  [3].)  Seehttp://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/extensible/ extensible-a-la-carte.htmlfor a detailed comparison with the oldEfflibrary. The present paper moves past the free monad to freer monad.
In comparison with monad transformers, the interaction of ef- fects inEffdepends not on the statically fixed order of transform- ers but on the order of effect interpreters and can even be adjusted dynamically (by interpreters that listen to and intercept other re- quests). See [21] for more extensive comparison with MTL. That 7 Since the user may write their own interpreter, they may well treatReader as an exception, which is not safe. We may prevent such a behavior by not exporting the data constructor for theReaderrequest.
paper relatesEffwith other effect systems known at that time. In the following we compareEffwith the systems introduced since.
The effect system of Idris [6] is an implementation of algebraic effects in the dependently-typed setting. The paper [6] introduces a  domain-specific  language  –  a  notation  –  for  describing  effect- ful computations and demonstrates the easy combination of effects.
The handlers are specifies as instances of a type class. The effect order is globally fixed and effects are interpreted essentially at the top  level;  there  is  no  encapsulation  of  effects.  The  paper  makes an excellent case that effect handlers provide a more flexible and cleaner alternative to monad transformers. We disagree about lim- itations: as we show in our implementation, the effect approach is more, rather than less expressive than monad transformers.
The closely related to our work is Kammar’s et al. “Handlers in  action”  [17].  Whereas  our  library  manages  sets  of  effects  us- ing both type-level constraints and type-level lists, Kammar et al.
rely only on type-class constraints. Constraints truly represent an unordered set. Using constraints exclusively however requires all effect handler definitions be top-level since Haskell does not sup- port local type class instances. Handlers in Action rely on Template Haskell to avoid much of the inconvenience of type-class encod- ing and provide a pliable user interface. The provided library has excellent performance, which can also been seen from our bench- marks  in§4.  The  use  of  Template  Haskell  however  significantly hinders the practical use of Handlers in Action. The present paper demonstrates that many of Kammar’s et al. benefits can be attained in a simple to develop and to use library, staying entirely within Haskell.
The freer or freer-like monads have already appeared before, yet connecting all the dots took long time. The origins of freer monads can be traced to the pioneering work of Hughes [14], Claessen [8] and Hinze [13], who introduced and explained the term represen- tation of effectful monadic computations. That representation was fully developed in the monad construction toolkit Unimo [23]: dataUnimo r a= Unit  a |Effect   (r  (Unimo r) a) | ∀b.  Bind (Unimo r b) (b→Unimo r a) It is quite close toFFreeof§2.4, in particular, theBindconstructor whose second argument accumulates the continuation. Dedicating a variantEffectfor effect requests proved to be a drawback, requir- ing the interpreter ofUnimo r amonad to deal with two separate but  very  similar  cases:Effect eandBind (Effect e) k.  One  can think of free monads as eliminating this boilerplate – and throwing away the explicit continuation argument in the process. OurFFree brings the explicit continuation back. Unimo aimed to provide ex- tensibility by emulating monad transformers. The Operational tu- torial [1] introduces dataProgram instr  awhere Then::instr    a→(a→Program instr  b)→Program instr  b Return::a→Program instr  a which  is  exactly  like  ourFFree.  The  tutorial  correctly  observed thatProgram instris a monad (although without proof). Alas the paper  mis-characterizedProgramas  a  GADT  (it  is  not:  it  is  a mere existential data type in GADT notation) and has not made the connection with the free monad. It is this connection that proves thatProgram instrreally  is  a  monad.  More  recently,  Kammar’s et al. also came within an inch of the freer monad: [17, Figure 5] contains the following definition dataComp h awhere Ret::a→Comp h a Do::(h 8 Handles 8 op )  e⇒ op e  u→(Return (op e  u  )→Comp h a )→Comp h a whereReturnis a type family andHandlesis a three-parameter type class. It is very, very similar toFFreeof§2.4, but with con- 
straints. The very similar data type, also with the constraints, ap- pears in [27] as the data typeNM ctx t afor constrained monad computations. Handlers in Action did not seem to have recognized that removing all the constraints gives a new algebraic data struc- ture that is a monad by construction. The paper describesComp in the traditional way: “the monadComp h, which is simply a free monad over the functor defined by those operationsopthat are han- dled byh(i.e. such that (h ‘Handles ‘ op ) e is defined for some typee)”.FFreein§2.4 requires no functors and has no constraints or preconditions; it is a monad, period.
The papers [1] and [17] have noted the performance problem of  free  monads  and  attempted  to  overcome  it  with  some  sort  of continuation  passing  –  which  works  only  up  to  the  (reflection) point, as explained in [31]. The latter paper, which introduced type- aligned sequences, also applied them to speed up free monads. The implementation  was  quite  complex,  with  the  mutually  recursive FreeMonadandFreeMonadView.  It  tried  hard  to  fit  the  type- aligned  sequences  into  the  traditional  2free  monads,  rather  than overcoming  them.  The  main  lesson  of  that  paper  –  representing a conceptual sequence of binds as an efficient data structure – is expressed most clear in the newEffmonad in§3.
The recent ‘Handlers in scope’ [33] gives the more traditional introduction of extensible effects based on Data types ` a la carte.
It also introduces the notion of a handler scope and two ways to support  it.  The  underlying  idea  seems  to  be  to  run  an  effectful computation at the place of its handler, so to speak. The detailed investigation of the notion of scope deserves its own paper.
Compared to the right Kan extensions, left Kan extensions seem to have found so far fewer applications in functional programming.
A  notable  application  is  Johann  and  Ghani’s  [16],  which  used  a specific form of left Kan extension (only with the equality GADTs) to develop the initial algebra semantics for GADTs.
9.    Conclusions We have rationally reconstructed the simplified and more efficient version of the extensible effects library and illustrated it with three new challenging applications: non-determinism, handling IO errors in the presence of other effects, and monadic regions. The new li- brary is based on the freer monad, a more general and more effi- cient version of the traditional free monads. To improve efficiency we systematically applied the lesson of the left Kan extension: in- stead of performing an operation, record the operands in the data structure and pretend it done.
The ambition is forEffto be the only monad in Haskell. Rather than defining new monads programmers will be defining new ef- fects, that is, effect interpreters.
Acknowledgments We are very grateful to Marcelo Fiore and Shin-ya Katsumata for many helpful discussions, especially with regard to Kan extensions.
We thank anonymous reviewers for many comments.
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants 22300005, 25540001, 15H02681.
References [1]  H. Apfelmus.  The Operational monad tutorial.The Monad.Reader, 15:37–56, 2010.
[2]  S.  Awodey.Category Theory,  volume  49  ofOxford Logic Guides.
Oxford University Press, 2006.
[3]  P.  Bahr.Composing  and  decomposing  data  types:  a  closed  type families  implementation  of  data  types ` a  la  carte.   InWGP@ICFP, pages 71–82. ACM Press, 31 Aug. 2014.
[4]  A.  Bauer  and  M.  Pretnar.   Programming  with  algebraic  effects  and handlers. arXiv:1203.1539 [cs.PL], 2012.
[5]  J.-P. Bernardy and N. Pouillard.  Names for free: polymorphic views of names and binders. In Haskell [11], pages 13–24.
[6]  E.  Brady.    Programming  and  reasoning  with  algebraic  effects  and dependent types. In ICFP [15], pages 133–144. .
[7]  R.  Cartwright  and  M.  Felleisen.    Extensible  denotational  language specifications. In M. Hagiya and J. C. Mitchell, editors,Theor. Aspects of Comp. Soft., number 789 in LNCS, pages 244–272. Springer, 1994.
[8]  K. Claessen.  Parallel parsing processes.J. Functional Programming, 14(6):741–757, 2004.
[9]  O. Danvy and A. Filinski.  Abstracting control.  InProceedings of the 1990 ACM Conference on Lisp and Functional Programming, pages 151–160. ACM Press, 27–29 June 1990.
[10]  M. Fluet and J. G. Morrisett.   Monadic regions.J. Functional Pro- gramming, 16(4–5):485–545, 2006.
[11]  Haskell.Haskell Symposium, 2013. ACM.
[12]  Haskell.Haskell Symposium, 2014. ACM.
[13]  R. Hinze.  Deriving backtracking monad transformers.  InICFP ’00, pages 186–197. ACM Press, 2000.
[14]  J. Hughes. The design of a pretty-printing library. InFirst Intl. Spring School on Adv. Functional Programming Techniques,  pages  53–96, London, UK, UK, 1995. Springer-Verlag.
[15]  ICFP.ICFP ’13, 2013. ACM Press.
[16]  P. Johann and N. Ghani. Foundations for structured programming with GADTs. InPOPL ’08, pages 297–308. ACM Press, 2008.
[17]  O. Kammar, S. Lindley, and N. Oury.   Handlers in action.   In ICFP [15], pages 145–158.
[18]  O. Kiselyov.  Iteratees.  InProc. of the 11th International Symposium on Functional and Logic Programming, pages 166–181, 2012.
[19]  O. Kiselyov and C.-c. Shan.  Lightweight monadic regions.  InProc.
2008 Haskell Symposium, pages 1–12. ACM Press, 2008.
[20]  O. Kiselyov, C.-c. Shan, D. P. Friedman, and A. Sabry.  Backtracking, interleaving, and terminating monad transformers (functional pearl).
InICFP ’05, pages 192–203. ACM Press, Sept. 2005.
[21]  O. Kiselyov, A. Sabry, and C. Swords.  Extensible effects: an alterna- tive to monad transformers. In Haskell [11], pages 59–70. .
[22]  S. Liang, P. Hudak, and M. Jones.  Monad transformers and modular interpreters. InPOPL ’95, pages 333–343. ACM Press, 1995.
[23]  C.-k. Lin.  Programming monads operationally with Unimo.  InICFP ’06, pages 274–285. ACM Press, 2006.
[24]  C. L  ̈ uth and N. Ghani. Composing monads using coproducts. InICFP ’02, pages 133–144. ACM Press, 2002.
[25]  L. Naish.   Pruning in logic programming.   Technical Report 95/16, Department of Computer Science, University of Melbourne, 1995.
[26]  G. Plotkin and M. Pretnar. Handlers of algebraic effects. InESOP ’09, pages 80–94, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer-Verlag.
[27]  N. Sculthorpe, J. Bracker, G. Giorgidze, and A. Gill. The constrained- monad problem. In ICFP [15], pages 287–298.
[28]  T. Sheard and E. Pa ˇ sali  ́ c. Two-level types and parameterized modules.
J. Functional Programming, 14(5):547–587, Sept. 2004.
[29]  G. L. Steele, Jr. Building interpreters by composing monads. InPOPL ’94, pages 472–492. ACM Press, 1994.
[30]  W. Swierstra.  Data types ` a la carte.J. Funct. Program., 18(4):423– 436, July 2008.
[31]  A. van der Ploeg and O. Kiselyov. Reflection without remorse: reveal- ing a hidden sequence to speed up monadic reflection. In Haskell [12], pages 133–144. .
[32]  N. Wu and T. Schrijvers.   Fusion for free: Efficient algebraic effect handlers. InMPC 2015, 2015. URL/Research/papers/mpc2015.
pdf.
[33]  N.  Wu,  T.  Schrijvers,  and  R.  Hinze.   Effect  handlers  in  scope.   In Haskell [12], pages 1–12.