National Transportation Safety Board  Office of Research and Engineering   Washington, DC 20594                            DCA23FM036    UNDERWATER CAMERA    Specialist's Factual Report  October 18, 2024       
  UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 2 OF 17  TABLE OF CONTENTS  A. ACCIDENT ........................................................................................................................ 3  B. UNDERWATER CAMERA SPECIALIST .......................................................................... 3  C. DETAILS OF THE INVESTIGATION ............................................................................... 3  1.0 DEVICE DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 3  1.1 Data Recovery ...................................................................................................... 3  1.2 Device Recording Description ......................................................................... 12  2.0 I MAGE/VIDEO FILES INFORMATION ............................................................................ 12  3.0 TIMING AND CORRELATION ....................................................................................... 13  3.1 Timing and Correlation Note ........................................................................... 16  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 3 OF 17  A. ACCIDENT  Location:  900 Nautical Miles east of Cape Cod, Massachusetts  Date:  June 18, 2023  Time:  0945 Eastern Daylight Time (EDT)   Submersible: OceanGate Titan  B. UNDERWATER CAMERA SPECIALIST  Specialist David Case   Computer Engineer / Vehicle Recorder Specialist   National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)  C. DETAILS OF THE INVESTIGATION  In agreement with the Investigator-In-Charge, an u nderwater camera group  was not convened and a summary was prepared.  The NTSB Vehicle Recorder Division received the following u nderwater video  recorder:  Device Manufacturer/Model: SubC Rayfin Mk2 Benthic Camera  Part Number:   Rayfin-MK2-HDE-6000-DBH13-LO  Device Serial Number:  SUBC21014    1.0 Device Description  The Subc Rayfin Mk2 Benthic is a camera designed to record video and still  images underwater, up to a rated depth of 6,000 meters. Data can be stored to  onboard memory, or to an attached computer, dependent on configuration.    The camera’s body is made of titanium, and the camera’s front optical window is  made of synthetic sapphire crystal to protect the lens and electronics inside.    1.1 Data Recovery  The camera was recovered from the wreckage location and delivered to the  Vehicle Recorder Laboratory.  The camera’s outer casing was intact (f  igure 1), but it  was noted that the camera’s lens, as viewed through the sapphire optical window,  was shattered (f  igure 2).  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 4 OF 17    Figure 1. SubC Rayfin Mk2 Benthic camera, side view.       Figure 2. SubC Rayfin Mk2 Benthic camera, front view.    The outside casing was gouged but remained intact. The casing was carefully  disassembled and an interior examination revealed the printed circuit boards were  partially damaged (figures 3-4). The connectors, used to mechanically join the boards  and pass electrical signals had sheared off. Several electrical components had also  separated from the circuit boards.    
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 5 OF 17    Figure 3. The camera’s circuit board and electrical components, after removing the outer casing. The  manufacturer of the camera had requested certain components of the device be redacted. Portions of  this image have been redacted.    
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 6 OF 17    Figure 4. Broken off and damaged inter-board connectors.    Contained on one of the circuit boards, a Secure Digital (SD) memory card was  found undamaged (f  igure 5).    Broken off  Damaged  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 7 OF 17    Figure 5. Removed SD card. The manufacturer of the camera had requested certain components of  the device be redacted. Portions of this image have been redacted.      An exact binary image of the SD card was made and examined with lab  equipment. It was determined that the card was partitioned into a small area for  holding  operating system 1  updates before they were applied, and a much larger  partition that was consistent with being fully encrypted.    Further examination revealed that the operating system version in the update  partition was from 2016, and would typically have used File Based Encryption (FBE 2 )  to encrypt it’s user data partition. The larger partition on the card was encrypted  similarly to Full Disk Encryption (FDE 3 ), which is an older encryption method used by  versions of the operating system from this same time frame.  FDE is implemented  using the Linux Unified Key Setup (LUKS 4 ) system, however, there was no LUKS    1  The camera manufacturer, Subc, has requested that the actual name of the operating system not be  mentioned for trade secrecy.  It will be referred to here as ‘the operating system’.  2  File based encryption is where the files are encrypted, but the file system is not.  You can still mount  the filesystem and get a list of filenames, sizes, etc. but the files themselves are unreadable unless  decrypted.  3  Full disk encryption means the entire partition is encrypted, including the directory information.  You  cannot mount the filesystem without the key.   4  LUKS is a standard for marking an encrypted partition with an unencrypted header that provides  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 8 OF 17  header found. Since the partition was fully encrypted, it was likely the file system was  encrypted through a custom configuration using dm-crypt 5
. The dm-crypt   configuration requires the use of a decryption key that is either stored separately  from the encrypted partition or entered by the user of the device.    SubC Imaging initially confirmed that camera data were stored on the SD card,  and they could download the data from the accident card at their office in Canada.  However, SubC determined that they were unable to perform this download  procedure using their own test card removed from a  camera and placed in a  surrogate camera of the same model.    The encryption key for the camera could not be found on the SD card, and the  SD card did not contain the boot partition for the camera.  The circuit boards were  examined, and a System-On-Module (SOM) board was found.  SOM’s are a popular  product for small companies that wish to make a device that needs significant  computing resources without having to spend thousands of hours designing a  complex small computer on their own.  The SOM contained a Central Processing Unit  (CPU or microcontroller), Random Access Memory (RAM), and a Non-Volatile 6   Random Access Memory (NVRAM) chip for permanent storage on a premade circuit  board (f  igure 6).  Software and documentation to make the board function is  generally provided by the SOM manufacturer as part of a Board Support Package  (BSP 7 ).        information about the encrypted partition.  It contains details on what cipher and hashing function are  being used.  5  dm-crypt is the Linux subsystem for encrypting file systems that is also available in the operating  system used on the device.  dm-crypt provides many options for encrypting a file system, including  whether or not you use a LUKS header.  6  Non-volatile memory is a type of computer memory that is retained if the device is turned off.  It  typically contains the software needed to run the device and is  also typically used to permanently store  data. On this particular device, the NVRAM stored the operating system, the camera software, and all  the configuration information needed to run the camera.  The data generated by the camera was  stored on the SD Card.  7  A BSP is typically provided by the SOM manufacturer as a set of documentation, software, and  hardware.  They get the operating system working on the device and provide that preloaded onto the  SOM board.  The hardware part of the package is typically an SOM with the operating system  preloaded and a second circuit board with extra circuitry needed to make the SOM function (typically a  power supply and connectors for peripherals).  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 9 OF 17      Figure 6. SOM top view (left) and bottom view (right). The manufacturer of the  camera had requested certain components of the device be redacted. Portions of this  image have been redacted.    The SOM showed signs of being damaged in the accident.  There was a crack  in the CPU chip, the inter-board connectors and several passive electronic  components were broken or had snapped off (figures 6-7).      Figure 7. The broken corner of the top die of the microcontroller on the SOM board.    It was likely the camera manufacturer may have never attempted to read the  SD card directly, since that would require disassembling the camera, which would  add wear on the water protection seal. Therefore, the SD card would always have  been accessed by a device connected to the back of the camera using an interface  cable. In this process, the operating system may encrypt and decrypt data without the  camera manufacturer’s knowledge.    Depending on configuration, the keys would be stored either on the NVRAM,  or as part of a system called TrustZone 8  that stores encryption keys directly on the    8  TrustZone is a complex web of technologies that in the context of this report could be used to hide  the cryptographic key for the SD Card.  This would effectively mean that the key would be stored on  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 10 OF 17  CPU.  Keys in the TrustZone would generally be irretrievably lost, given the broken  status of the CPU.     The SOM board manufacturer was contacted, and they said that they provided  a sample operating system install with the boards when they shipped them, and that  they did not knowingly set up encryption for the user data partition.  They also  confirmed that any keys stored would be either on the NVRAM chip, or in the CPU’s  TrustZone.     Two likely paths to get at the data on the SD Card were postulated.  One  method would be to read the contents of the NVRAM chip on the SOM, look for a  key, and then use that key to decrypt the data (the Software Route). The other  method would be to move the NVRAM’s contents to another SOM module and  attempt to boot off of the accident’s NVRAM on that device (the Hardware Route).   The software route was problematic because it could be time intensive, and the  hardware route was difficult because it would require the chips to be programmed  and soldered on to a new board, which increases the risk of the activity, and the new  NVRAM was not guaranteed to be compatible with the surrogate SOM.    Lab equipment was used to remove the NVRAM chip from the SOM (Figure 8).   It was determined that the chip was not a standard eMMC flash device, but used  another technology called Universal Flash Storage 9  (UFS).  The SOM manufacturer  was consulted, and a chip reader that would work with a UFS device was purchased.   The chip was successfully read with the UFS reader, and it was determined that the  contents of the NVRAM were not encrypted, but the key for the SD Card was likely  hidden in files that were generated by the CPU chip manufacturer, who was reticent  to supply the tools to decode the information.       the CPU and could only be used to decrypt the data if the physical CPU from the accident was used.   9  Most of the similar devices we see use eMMC flash memories that are electrically identical to an SD  card and can easily be read with standard lab equipment.  UFS is a newer standard designed to  replace eMMC and this is the first one we have seen.  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 11 OF 17        Figure 8. Preparing the NVRAM chip to be removed from the SOM board.    After obtaining a good copy of the data on the NVRAM chip, it was determined  to focus on the hardware route as a means of practical data recovery.  The camera  manufacturer was contacted and said they would provide a surrogate SOM board to  put a copy of the NVRAM on, but did not provide ancillary equipment needed to  make the board work.       A phone meeting with SubC and the Canadian Transportation Safety Board  (TSB) 10  was convened, and during the resulting conversation, it was determined that  SubC thought the data was not encrypted, but simply in a file system that they  couldn’t figure out how to access.    The camera manufacturer was supplied with the methodology used by the  NTSB to determine if the data on the SD Card were encrypted.  After deliberation,  SubC agreed that the data on the SD Card were encrypted.  SubC also agreed that if  the key was stored in the NVRAM, we should be able to decrypt the SD Card using  the NVRAM chip on a surrogate SOM board.      With the cooperation of the TSB and SubC, an agreement was made for the  surrogate SOM board to be taken to SubC’s Clarenville, Newfoundland office to  attempt a read out of data using SubC’s equipment to be performed in conjunction  with both the NTSB and the TSB.
11     Two SOM boards were populated with a new NVRAM chip; one with a copy of  the original NVRAM chip, and one with the original accident NVRAM chip.  Two SD    10  “The TSB is an independent Canadian agency and is conducting its own independent investigation  into this occurrence. NTSB consulted the TSB as the TSB has jurisdiction in Clarenville NL where SubC  is located.  11  Thank you to both SubC and the TSB’s Newfoundland office for all the support provided.  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 12 OF 17  Cards were also flown to Clarenville, the original, and a byte-for-byte copy using the  same manufacturer and model of SD Card.    The copied NVRAM and SD card were connected to the manufacturer’s  hardware, and the data on the SD card were successfully downloaded using the  manufacturer’s procedure (f  igure 9).      Figure 9. Device being downloaded in Clarenville    1.2 Device Recording Description  12 still images and 9 videos were recovered from the device.  2.0 Image/Video Files Information  The Rayfin camera stored still images at a resolution of 4056x3040 pixels, and  video with a resolution of 3840x2160 pixels at 25 frames per second (figure 10).  Recorded imagery data were stored on the SD card built into the camera, and  in regular use would be retrieved through the download cable interface over an  ethernet connection. Figure 10 is an image recovered from the camera.    
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 13 OF 17    Figure 10. Image from the SubC camera showing the camera field of view.  3.0 Timing and Correlation  The camera was designed to acquire the current time from an attached  computer through the Network Time Protocol (NTP).  If a computer was not attached  to the camera, the camera would set the time to midnight, January 1, 1970,  Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).     The files were written with the time zone set to Newfoundland Daylight Time  (NDT), which is UTC minus 2 hours 30 minutes.  The files were mostly written within a  few minutes of the camera being turned on, so the invalid timestamps are mostly in  the last hours of 1969.     Two files on the SD card were given valid time stamps.  The first file is a video,  consistent with being taken on the quay at Holyrood, Newfoundland, showing the  rear wheel and stabilizer arm of a crane taken on May 10, 2023.  The second file is an  image taken at sea on May 16, 2023.  A 5-gallon bucket and the toe of a work boot  was in the field of view (f  igure 13).    
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 14 OF 17  Three images without timestamps taken on the quay at Holyrood show a boat,  the Research Vessel (RV) Ludy Pudlak sitting on blocks on the quay (f  igure 11).   Automatic Identification System (AIS) data were found for the Ludy Pudlak during the  timeframe when the Oceangate Titan was in Holyrood and only one GPS position was  reported as being on the quay, which likely confirms these images were taken the  morning o f May 5, 2023.      Figure 11. Image taken on the quay at Holyrood, the Ludy Pudlak can be seen behind the LARS  placed out of the water on blocks.    Three videos were taken underwater, all with similar lighting conditions and  the immediate environment around the camera being the same.  The Launch and  Recovery System (LARS) can be seen, and light is filtering down from the surface.     OceanGate was able to identify the diver in the video from his diving suit and  gear.  This diver was only involved in Missions 1 and 2 of 2023, and was only present  for shallow water training, likely near Bay Bulls Newfoundland.  The accident dive was  2023 Mission #5.    
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 15 OF 17    Figure 12.  Still image taken from underwater video, showing the diver.    Three videos were also taken in the Marine Institute main campus ROV shop.  The time of recording could not be determined (figure 13).      Figure 13.  The Titan sitting in the ROV shop at the Marine Institute.    
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 16 OF 17  3.1 Timing and Correlation Note  The camera stored still images in a directory named ‘Stills’, and video in a  directory named ‘Videos’.  One still image was stored in a different directory:    mnt/nas/Stills     SubC was consulted, and they had seen this behavior before.  The camera can  be configured to store data on a connected device, and not to internal storage.  If the  external device was not connected, or the path to the connected device was  incorrectly entered, the camera would create all the directories needed to store the  images wherever the user configured to put them.  The file system on the camera  stores all files in the same tree, so mounted network file shares are indistinguishable  from the local filesystem from the camera software’s perspective.     It is likely that the camera was being configured to store its data to the onboard  computer on May 16 th , with one image being stored accidentally to the camera’s SD  Card and then configured properly to store data to the computer on board the  submersible (Figure 13).  No data with a timestamp after May 16 th  was found on the  camera, so it is likely that none of the data recorded on the SD Card were of the  accident voyage or dive.  
    UNDERWATER CAMERA  DCA23FM036  SPECIALIST'S FACTUAL REPORT   PG 17 OF 17    Figure 13.  The last image stored to the SD card with a timestamp on May 16, 2023.
    Submitted by:    David L. Case  Computer Engineer / Vehicle Recorder Specialist