Coq: The world’s best macro assembler?
Andrew KennedyNick Benton Microsoft Research {akenn,nick}@microsoft.com Jonas B. Jensen ITU Copenhagen jobr@itu.dk Pierre-Evariste Dagand University of Strathclyde dagand@cis.strath.ac.uk Abstract We describe a Coq formalization of a subset of the x86 architecture.
One emphasis of the model is brevity: using dependent types, type classes  and  notation  we  give  the  x86  semantics  a  makeover  that counters its reputation for baroqueness. We model bits, bytes, and memory  concretely  using  functions  that  can  be  computed  inside Coq  itself;  concrete  representations  are  mapped  across  to  math- ematical  objects  in  the  SSREFLECTlibrary  (naturals,  and  inte- gers  modulo2 n )  to  prove  theorems.  Finally,  we  use  notation  to support conventional assembly code syntax inside Coq, including lexically-scoped labels. Ordinary Coq definitions serve as a pow- erful “macro” feature for everything from simple conditionals and loops to stack-allocated local variables and procedures with param- eters. Assembly code can be assembled within Coq, producing a sequence of hex bytes. The assembler enjoys a correctness theo- rem relating machine code in memory to a separation-logic formula suitable for program verification.
1.  Introduction The Coq proof assistant [27] is remarkably versatile, with appli- cations that span deep, research-level mathematics [14], program- ming language metatheory [1] and compiler correctness for realis- tic languages [17]. As part of a larger project tackling verification of systems software, we have used Coq tomodela subset of the x86 machine architecture,generatebinary code for it, andspecify andproveproperties of that code [16]. This paper concerns the first two of these tasks, showcasing Coq as a rich language for giving very readable (and executable) semantics for instruction set archi- tectures, and as a tool for both writing assembly language programs and generating machine code from them. Using the semantics and assembler as a foundation, the full power of Coq’s abstraction and proof capabilities can be brought to bear on low-level programs.
1.1  An example Figure 1 presents code that computes the factorials of 10 and 12 and prints them to the console using an externalprintffunction whose address is loaded from an indirection table. When we run coqcover this file, the code is assembled to produce a hexadecimal dump, which is then easily transformed to binary.
>coqc fact.v = "EB 1A B8 01 00 00 00 B9 01 00 00 00 EB 04 F7 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
PPDP ’13,September 16 - 18 2013, Madrid, Spain Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Copyright c ©ACM [to be supplied]. . . $15.00 Definition call_cdecl3 f arg1 arg2 arg3 := PUSH arg3;; PUSH arg2;; PUSH arg1;; CALL f;; ADD ESP, 12.
Definition main (printfSlot: DWORD) := (* Argument in EBX *) letproc fact := MOV EAX, 1;; MOV ECX, 1;; (* while ECX <= EBX *) while (CMP ECX, EBX) CC_LE true ( MUL ECX;; (* Multiply EAX by ECX *) INC ECX ) in LOCAL format; MOV EBX, 10;; callproc fact;; MOV EDI, printfSlot;; call_cdecl3 [EDI] format EBX EAX;; MOV EBX, 12;; callproc fact;; MOV EDI, printfSlot;; call_cdecl3 [EDI] format EBX EAX;; RET 0;; format:;; ds "Factorial of %d is %d";; db #10;; db #0.
Compute bytesToHex (assemble #x"C0000004" (main #x"C0000000")).
Figure 1.x86 factorial, assembled by Coq E1 FF C1 3B CB 0F 8E F4 FF FF FF FF E7 BB 0A 00 00 00 BF 2C 00 00 C0 EB DA BF 00 00 00 C0 50 53 68 61 00 00 C0 FF 17 81 C4 0C 00 00 00 BB 0C 00 00 00 BF 4C 00 00 C0 EB BA BF 00 00 00 C0 50 53 68 61 00 00 C0 FF 17 81 C4 0C 00 00 00 C3 46 61 63 74 6F 72 69 61 6C 20 6F 66 20 25 64 20 69 73 20 25 64 0A 00 " : string Even this tiny example shows the power of Coq as an assembler.
Ordinary  Coq  definitions,  such  ascall_cdecl3,  serve  as  user- defined macros, here expanding to the standard calling sequence for  a  three-argument  function  that  uses  the  x86cdeclcalling convention.
Thewhileandletprocsyntax are “built-in” macros that pro- vide looping and procedural control constructs, hiding the use of scoped labels, branching, and a simple calling convention behind a useful abstraction. TheLOCALnotation provides scoped labels, here used to identify inline data, created usingdsanddbdirectives for string and byte constants respectively.
Observe how assembly code syntax, familiar to users of tools such  as  MASM,  is  embedded  directly  in  Coq  source.  Also  note how the assembler itself is executed inside Coq (placing the code 
at fixed addressC0000004and assuming thatprintf’s slot is at C0000000), and its output (a sequence of bytes) can be sent to the console in hexadecimal format.
One route to actually executing such code is to produce a stan- dard executable format from within Coq, such as the Portable Exe- cutable (PE) form used by Microsoft Windows: Definition bytes := makePEfile EXE "winfact.exe" #x"00760000" [::Build_DLLImport "MSVCRT.DLL" [::ImportByName "printf"]] (dd #0) (fun _ imports⇒main (hd #0 (hd nil imports))).
Compute bytesToHex bytes.
ThemakePEfilefunction requires a load address for the image, a list of imports from dynamically linked libraries (here, theprintf function that is located in the C runtime libraryMSVCRT.DLL), and an assembler program, parameterized on the imports. Having run coqcover this file we can then run a trivial hex-to-binary tool to produce an executable: >coqc winfact.v >winfact.hex >hexbin winfact.hex winfact.exe >winfact Factorial of 10 is 3628800 Factorial of 12 is 479001600 Alternatively, we can run code on bare metal – or in a virtual machine – by appending a small boot loader, outside of Coq, and then constructing a CD image suitable for booting. Figure 2 shows a screen shot of a larger example created this way: the classic Game of Life written entirely in assembler in Coq.
Figure 2.Game of Life 1.2  Contributions Modelling.We show how Coq features such as dependent types, type classes, implicit coercions, indexed inductive types, and user- defined notation combine to support a clean formalization of ma- chine code – in our case, a subset of x86. Many others have formal- ized machine code, but our approach has a number of interesting features: • The  representation  of  machine  words  and  operations  is  con- crete,  using  tuples  of  booleans  to  represent  bit  vectors,  and implementing arithmetic and other operations directly as com- putable  Coq  functions,  but  types  are  informative,  with  fine- grained parameterization on word lengths. To prove theorems we exploit the embeddingB n ↪→Nof bit strings into the nat- urals and the isomorphismB n ∼ = Z 2 n of binary with with in- tegers modulo2 n , enabling use of a rich collection of lemmas from the SSREFLECTMathematical Components library [15].
• An  abstract,  monadic  treatment  ofreadersandwriters,  with separate  functional,  imperative  and  logical  interpretations,  is unusual, and facilitates the reuse of binary format descriptions and proofs ofround-tripproperties.
• The  semantics  of  execution  itself  is  particularly  concise,  due mainly to our use of monadic syntax and careful factoring of the instruction type and auxiliary definitions.
Assembling.Our approach to generating code entirely inside Coq is novel: • Coq notations and implicit coercions let us write assembly syn- tax that is cut-and-paste-compatible with standard Intel syntax.
• We  support  lexically-scoped  labels  within  assembly  code, through a kind of higher-order abstract syntax, and build veri- fied abstractions such as control structures and procedure call- ing conventions over the top.
• We  have  proved  that  our  instruction  decoder  is  a  left-inverse of  our  instruction  encoder  and  that  our  assembler  preserves correctness proofs of the assembled programs.
• We show how a verified compiler for regular expressions may be constructed, building on a third-party formalization of the theory of Kleene algebras.
2.  Modelling x86 The  x86  architecture  and  instruction  set  is  notoriously  complex: the current Intel manual detailing the instruction set alone runs to 1288 pages [11]. Although we so far model only a small subset, even  here  we  must  get  to  grips  with  rich  addressing  modes  and a  variable-length,  non-uniform  instruction  format.  In  addition  to aiming forbrevityin our Coq description – to facilitate readability and extension – we also wanted an executable semantics. Running the first two instructions from the example in Figure 1 produces the following state changes (assuming that the initial value ofESPis D0000000): Coq < Compute procStateToString (runFor 0 s).
= " EIP=C0000000 ESP=D0000000 EBP=00000000 EAX=00000000 EBX=00000000 ..." Coq < Compute procStateToString (runFor 1 s).
= " EIP=C0000001 ESP=CFFFFFFC EBP=00000000 EAX=00000000 EBX=00000000 ..." Coq < Compute procStateToString (runFor 2 s).
= " EIP=C0000003 ESP=CFFFFFFC EBP=CFFFFFFC EAX=00000000 EBX=00000000 ..." 2.1  Bits, bytes and all that We start with a concrete representation for bit vectors.
Definition BITS n := n.-tuple bool.
Definition NIBBLE := BITS 4.
Definition BYTE := BITS 8.
Definition WORD := BITS 16.
Definition DWORD := BITS 32.
Definition QWORD := BITS 64.
Definition DWORDorBYTE (d: bool) := BITS (if d then 32 else 8).
 Then.-tupletype  of  SSREFLECTis  used  to  representn-bit words concretely and efficiently, with synonyms defined for bytes, 16-bit words and 32-bit words. TheDWORDorBYTEtype is used for literals in instructions that have byte and 32-bit word variants, and illustrates  well  how  ‘lightweight’  dependent  types  are  handy  for formalizing  machine  semantics.  Syntax  is  provided  for  decimal, hexadecimal, binary and character constants: Example fortytwo := #42 : BYTE.
Example fortytwo1 := #x"2A".
Example fortytwo2 := #b"00101010".
Example fortytwo3 := #c"*".
The notations#xand#bexpand to the following two functions, demonstrating another application of dependent types: Fixpoint fromHex s : BITS (length s * 4) := if s is String c s then joinNibble (charToNibble c) (fromHex s) else #0.
Fixpoint fromBin s : BITS (length s) := if s is String c s then joinmsb (charToBit c, fromBin s) else #0.
Theif. . .isnotation is SSREFLECTsyntactic sugar formatch.
Using  indexing  in  the  type  of  words  allows  accurate  typing of machine operations such as arithmetic, shifts, and rotates. For example, the “carry-out” of operations such as addition and shift- left is simply expressed as the most significant bit of the result, and full  bit-length  multiplication  produces  a  result  whose  size  is  the sum of the sizes of its inputs: Fixpoint adcB n carry : BITS n→BITS n→BITS n.+1.
Definition dropmsb {n} : BITS n.+1→BITS n.
Definition addB {n} (p1 p2: BITS n) := dropmsb (adcB false p1 p2).
Definition fullmulB {n1 n2} : BITS n1→BITS n2 →BITS (n1+n2).
Definition shlB {n} : BITS n→BITS n.+1.
Definition catB {n1 n2} : BITS n1→BITS n2 →BITS (n2+n1).
Notation "x ## y" := (catB x y) (right associativity, at level 60).
This concrete representation also makes computation over words relatively efficient; this is important as both code generation and the  direct  execution  of  the  machine  model  for  testing  purposes involve  performing  substantial  bit-level  computation  inside  Coq.
Performance  is  adequate  for  these  purposes:  a  quick  test  reveals that we can achieve roughly 150,000 32-bit increments per second, and 11,000 32-bit additions (on a 3.6Ghz Intel Xeon CPU).
Proofs of properties of word operations often proceed by induc- tion onn. For arithmetic, however, we found it useful to map ma- chine representations onto more abstract mathematical types pro- vided by SSREFLECT, either embeddingBITS nintonator using the bijection with’Z_(2^n), the type of integers modulo2 n
. (Note that for both of these forms, representations are unique, so we can reason using standard Coq equality.) Here, for example, is the proof that addition is associative: Lemma addBA n : associative (@addB n).
Proof. move⇒x y z. destruct n; first apply trivialBits.
apply toZp_inj. autorewrite with ZpHom.
by rewrite addrA. Qed.
The first line of the proof discharges the trivial case of zero bits.
Next we use the lemmatoZp_inj, which states that toZp: BITS n→’Z_(2^n) is injective, in order to transform the goal from addB x (addB y z) = addB (addB x y) z to toZp (addB x (addB y z)) = toZp (addB (x y) z).
We  then  push  the  embedding  inwards  by  appealing  to  the  hint databaseZpHom, which contains lemmas expressing thattoZpbe- haves homomorphically with respect to all relevant arithmetic op- erations – in particularaddBand addition on the ring. Finally we use the associativity of addition on the target, as provided by the SSREFLECTlibrary. Many other properties are proved using the same recipe.
2.2  Memory To model memory we use an implementation of finite partial maps whose domain isn-bit words. We could define this abstractly us- ingBITS n -> option V, but as with machine words we prefer something more concrete that can be used for efficient execution of instruction semantics inside Coq. We use a variant oftries, splitting on a bit of the address at each level, withNEPMAP nrepresenting non-empty maps, andPMAP nfor possibly-empty maps: Variable V: Type.
Inductive NEPMAP : nat→Type := | VAL   : V→NEPMAP 0 | SPLIT :∀n (lo hi: NEPMAP n), NEPMAP n.+1 | LSPLIT :∀n (lo : NEPMAP n), NEPMAP n.+1 | RSPLIT :∀n (hi : NEPMAP n), NEPMAP n.+1.
Inductive PMAP n := | PMap     : NEPMAP n→PMAP n | EmptyPMap : PMAP n.
Definition lookup n (m: PMAP n) (p: BITS n) : option V := if m is PMap m’ then lookupNE m’ p else None.
Global Coercion lookup : PMAPFunclass.
wherelookupNErecurses down anNEPMAP; at each non-leaf level, the constructor determines whether the left, right, or both subtrees are present. A benefit of this fussiness is uniqueness of representa- tion: two values of typePMAP nare equal in Coq if and only if they are extensionally equal. This is expressed by the following lemma, which makes use of the implicit coercion between function appli- cation andlookup: Lemma extensional_PMAP n V: ∀(m1 m2: PMAP V n), (∀x, m1 x = m2 x)→m1 = m2.
Memory is then a partial map from 32-bit addresses to bytes, in which the absence of an element indicates that the memory is not mapped, or is inaccessible: Definition Mem := PMAP BYTE 32.
In future we plan to refine the model to account for non-writable and non-executable memory.
2.3  Monads To abstract a little from the details of execution, decoding, assem- bling, and so on, we make use of monads. We employ Coq’s type classes for packaging [25], defining a classMonadOpsfor syntax andMonadfor the monad laws, along with some useful notation.
Class MonadOps T := { retn {X} : X→T X ; bind {X Y} : T X→(X→T Y)→T Y }.
Class Monad T {ops: MonadOps T} := { id_l X Y (x: X) (f: X→T Y) : bind (retn x) f = f x ; id_r X (c: T X) : bind c retn = c ; assoc X Y Z (c: T X) (f: X→T Y) (g : Y→T Z) : bind (bind c f) g = bind c (fun x⇒bind (f x) g) }.
 Notation "’let!’ x = c ; d" := (bind c (fun x⇒d)) (...) Notation "’do!’ c ; d" := (bind c (fun _⇒d)) Concrete  instances  ofMonadinclude  an  error  monad  and  state monad transformer, both of which are used in the semantics of in- struction execution. For reading and writing memory, and decoding and encoding of instructions, we define reader and writer monads, which are discussed next.
2.4  Readers and writers Reading and writing sequences of bytes representing some other type of data, such as 32-bit words, or variable-length instructions, pervades our framework. We found it surprisingly difficult to devise an appropriate interface for these operations.
Firstly,  there  are  issues  with  edge  cases.  Typically  one  has  a pointer  which  is  advanced  as  bytes  are  read  or  written;  but  the situation at the top-of-memory must be handled, and we wish to model contiguous memory ranges, possibly empty, and possibly all of memory. To tackle this we introduced aCursortype, a value of which is either a concreten-bit address, or a valuetoprepresenting the address just beyond the end of memory.
Variable n:nat.
Inductive Cursor := mkCursor (p: BITS n) | top.
When reading or writing bytes, the cursor is advanced, but doesnot wrap around to zero, instead taking on the valuetop. (Compare the notion of EOF used in file I/O.) Memory ranges can be repre- sented by a pair of cursors (p,q) interpreted as the memory fromp inclusive toqexclusive.
A second issue was the need for multiple ‘views’ of reading and writing. Sometimes we wish to view reading and writing in a pure, functional style, in which a reader consumes, and a writer produces, a sequence of bytes. In other situations we want to make reads and writes on our concrete model of memory, for example, when speci- fying the execution behaviour of instructions. A third view, used in specifications, interprets readers and writers aspredicateson partial states, with sequencing interpreted by separating conjunction.
To support these various views of reading and writing, we intro- duce inductively-definedtermsfor readers and writers.
Readers.A reader is defined as follows: Inductive ReaderTm T := | readerRetn (x: T) | readerNext (rd: BYTE→ReaderTm T) | readerCursor (rd: Cursor 32→ReaderTm T).
Class Reader T := getReaderTm : ReaderTm T.
Instance readBYTE : Reader BYTE := readerNext (fun b⇒readerRetn b).
A reader for typeTeither returns a value of typeTimmediately, or  consumes  a  single  byte  and  then  continues,  or  asks  for  the current value of the cursor and continues. This last feature is used in instruction decoding to implement relative addressing for branch instructions. Given appropriate definitions for monad unit and bind operations, we can defineMonadOps ReaderandMonad Reader instances, and easily create readers for various types. For example, here is a reader for 32-bit words, in little-endian format: Definition bytesToDWORD (b3 b2 b1 b0: BYTE) : DWORD := b3 ## b2 ## b1 ## b0.
Instance readDWORD : Reader DWORD := let! b0 = readNext; let! b1 = readNext; let! b2 = readNext; let! b3 = readNext; retn (bytesToDWORD b3 b2 b1 b0).
Let’s now interpret readers. First, functionally: Definition runReader T : Reader T→Cursor 32→seq BYTE→ option (Cursor 32 * seq BYTE * T).
Given a list of bytes and an initial cursor position, bytes are read sequentially,  resulting  in  a  new  position  (possiblytop),  residual bytes, and a value; the valueNoneis returned if there are insuffi- cient bytes or if bytes attopare read.
Our  second  interpretation  is  imperative  and  operates  on  our model  of  memory,Mem.  This  time  we  distinguish  between  read- ing beyond the end of memory (readerWrap), and reading an un- mapped byte (readerFail).
Inductive readerResult T := readerOk (x: T) (q: Cursor 32) | readerWrap | readerFail.
Definition readMem T : Reader T→Cursor 32→Mem→readerResult T.
Finally, we can give alogicalview of a reader, expressed as a ‘store predicate’ (SPred) which we discuss in detail elsewhere [16].
Definition interpReader T: Reader T→Cursor 32→Cursor 32→T→SPred.
Given a readerRfor typeT, the predicateinterpReader R p q x holds of a state if the bytes between cursorspandqcan be ‘read back’ as valuexof typeT.
Writers.For writers, we again define a term syntax with appro- priate monadic unit and bind operations; a writer for typeTis then a function fromTtoWriterTm unit.
Inductive WriterTm A := | writerRetn (x: A) | writerNext (b: BYTE) (w: WriterTm A) | writerCursor (w: Cursor 32→WriterTm A) | writerFail.
Class Writer T := getWriterTm: T→WriterTm unit.
As with readers, our monadic syntax makes the definition of writers for various types straightforward: Instance writeBYTE : Writer BYTE := fun b⇒writerNext b (writerRetn tt).
Instance writeDWORD : Writer DWORD := fun d⇒ let: (b3,b2,b1,b0) := split4 8 8 8 8 d in do! writeBYTE b0; do! writeBYTE b1; do! writeBYTE b2; do! writeBYTE b3; retn tt.
Writers have functional, imperative, and logical interpretations: Definition runWriter T : Writer T→Cursor 32→T→option (seq BYTE).
Definition writeMem T : Writer T→Cursor 32→T→Mem→ option (Cursor 32 * Mem).
Definition interpWriter T : Writer T→Cursor 32→Cursor 32→T→SPred.
To show that a reader correctly decodes anything produced by a writer, we construct an inductively definedsimulation relationbe- tween them. The relationsimrw x p R Wsays that readerRsimu- lates writerWfor the purpose of reading valuexstarting at position p, meaning thatRandWessentially proceed in lock step, except that they are allowed to read the cursor position independently of each other. If the writer fails, there is no restriction on the reader.
Inductive simrw {X T} (x: X) : Cursor 32→Reader X→WriterTm T→Prop := | simrw_retn p t: simrw x p (readerRetn x) (writerRetn t) 
| simrw_next p R b W’: simrw x (next p) (R b) W’→ simrw x p (readerNext R) (writerNext b W’) | simrw_rcursor p R’ W: simrw x p (R’ p) W→ simrw x p (readerCursor R’) W | simrw_wcursor p R W’: simrw x p R (W’ p)→ simrw x p R (writerCursor W’) | simrw_fail p R: simrw x p R writerFail | simrw_top R b W’: simrw x (top _) R (writerNext b W’).
If for anyxand positionpa readerRand writerWare related by simrwthen they satisfy around-tripproperty: Class Roundtrip X (R: Reader X) (W: Writer X) := roundtrip:∀x p, simrw x p R (W x).
The following implication about round-tripping holds in our pro- gram logic [16], which intuitively means “if memory fromptoq containsxas written byW, then reading back that range of memory withRproduces the samex”.
Lemma interpWriter_roundtrip X (W: Writer X) (R: Reader X) {RT: Roundtrip R W} p q x: interpWriter p q x`interpReader p q x.
TheX,RandWarguments to the interpretations above are implicit.
2.5  Instructions The x86 instruction set design is complex, and shows its history.
However,  some  structure  can  be  discerned,  and  is  sufficient  to support the definition of a Coq inductive type for instructions that istotal: every value in the type represents a valid instruction, for which there is a defined encoding.
Registers.The  32-bit  x86  processor  has  eight  general-purpose registers,  a  flags  register  (EFLAGS),  and  an  instruction  pointer (EIP).  (We  do  not  yet  model  the  legacy  segment  registers,  FPU registers or SIMD registers.) We further divide the general-purpose registers into ESP (the stack pointer) and the remainder, because ESP is not allowed to participate in certain addressing modes.
Inductive NonSPReg := | EAX | EBX | ECX | EDX | ESI | EDI | EBP.
Inductive Reg := nonSPReg (r: NonSPReg) | ESP.
Inductive AnyReg := regToAnyReg (r: Reg) | EIP.
Some instructions can address the original 8-bit subregisters of the 8086.
Inductive BYTEReg := AL|BL|CL|DL|AH|BH|CH|DH.
Definition DWORDorBYTEReg (d: bool) := if d then Reg else BYTEReg.
Addressing modes.The addressing modes used by most instruc- tions are captured by the inductive definitions of Figure 3. To take an example, binary operations such as arithmetic and logical oper- ations take two operands, one of which is also used as the desti- nation. The instructionadd EAX, [EBX + ECX*4 + 14]makes use of the most complex addressing mode, indirecting through an address that is computed as the sum of a base registerEBX, an in- dex registerECXscaled by 4, and the fixed offset14. This would be represented by DstSrcRM EAX (mkMemSpec EBX (Some(ECX, S4)) #14).
Instructions.Now  let’s  tackle  the  instructions  themselves.  We abstract just far enough above the binary encoding, but not too far.
Sometimes there is more than one way to encode essentially the same instruction, and we do not make this distinction in the data Inductive Scale := S1 | S2 | S4 | S8.
Inductive MemSpec := mkMemSpec (base: Reg) (indexAndScale: option (NonSPReg*Scale)) (offset: DWORD).
Inductive RegMem d := | RegMemR (r: DWORDorBYTEReg d) | RegMemM (ms: MemSpec).
Inductive Src := | SrcI (c: DWORD) | SrcM (ms: MemSpec) | SrcR (r: Reg).
Inductive DstSrc (d: bool) := | DstSrcRR (dst src: DWORDorBYTEReg d) | DstSrcRM (dst: DWORDorBYTEReg d) (src: MemSpec) | DstSrcMR (dst: MemSpec) (src: DWORDorBYTEReg d) | DstSrcRI (dst: DWORDorBYTEReg d) (c: DWORDorBYTE d) | DstSrcMI (dst: MemSpec) (c: DWORDorBYTE d).
Figure 3.Addressing modes Inductive BinOp := | OP_ADC | OP_ADD | OP_AND | OP_CMP | OP_OR | OP_SBB | OP_SUB | OP_XOR.
Inductive UnaryOp := | OP_INC | OP_DEC | OP_NOT | OP_NEG.
Inductive Condition := | CC_O | CC_B | CC_Z | CC_BE | CC_S | CC_P | CC_L | CC_LE.
Inductive Instr := | UOP d (op: UnaryOp) (dst: RegMem d) | BOP d (op: BinOp ) (ds: DstSrc d) | BITOP (op: BitOp) (dst: RegMem true) (bit: RegImm false) | TESTOP d (dst: RegMem d) (src: RegImm d) | MOVOP d (ds: DstSrc d) | MOVX (signextend w:bool) (dst: Reg) (src: RegMem w) | SHIFTOP d (op: ShiftOp) (dst: RegMem d) (count: ShiftCount) | MUL {d} (src: RegMem d) | IMUL (dst: Reg) (src: RegMem true) | LEA (reg: Reg) (src: RegMem true) | JCC (cc: Condition) (cv: bool) (tgt: Tgt) | PUSH (src: Src) | POP (dst: RegMem true) | CALL (tgt: JmpTgt) | JMP (tgt: JmpTgt) | CLC | STC | CMC | RETOP (size: WORD) | OUT (d: bool) (port: BYTE) | IN (d: bool) (port: BYTE) | HLT | BADINSTR.
Figure 4.Supported instruction set type. Furthermore, the encoding of branches and certain calls uses EIP-relative addressing. Our data type uses absolute addresses uni- formly – this makes it slightly easier to formalize the execution se- mantics, andmucheasier to support scoped labels and proof rules for control-flow instructions, as code addresses are uniform. The instructions we have currently formalized are shown in Figure 4.
Notice  the  extensive  use  of  dependency  (thedparameter)  in  in- structions such asMOVthat have two flavours, one for bytes, the other for 32-bit words.
2.6  Operational semantics In essence, the machine is modelled as a state-to-state transition function, a single step consisting of decoding the next instruction and then  executing it. The  function is partial  – because we  only model a subset of instructions, and some behaviour is left unspec- 
ified  –  and  so  we  structure  it  monadically,  layering  anoption monad over a state monad.
Machine  state.The  machine  state  splits  into  three:  registers, flags,  and  memory.  Register  state  is  modelled  as  a  (finite)  func- tion: Definition RegState := AnyReg→DWORD.
We model flags separately, in order to model the unspecified effect that some x86 instructions have on them.
Definition Flag := BITS 5.
Definition CF: Flag := #0. Definition PF: Flag := #2.
Definition ZF: Flag := #6. Definition SF: Flag := #7.
Definition OF: Flag := #11.
Inductive FlagVal := mkFlag (b: bool) | FlagUnspecified.
Coercion mkFlag : boolFlagVal.
Definition FlagState := Flag→FlagVal.
Putting registers, flags, and memory together gives us the pro- cessor state: Record ProcState := mkProcState { registers:> RegState; flags:> FlagState; memory:> Mem }.
Instruction decoding.Instruction decoding is implemented as an instance ofReader, making good use of the monadic syntax mixed with simple Coq computation. The fragment here, for example, has just decoded anFEbyte: let! (opx,dst) = readNext; if opx == #b"000" then retn (UOP false OP_INC dst) else if opx == #b"001" then retn (UOP false OP_DEC dst) else retn BADINSTR), In the operational semantics, we interpret the instruction reader us- ingreadMem, picking up the memory component from the proces- sor state.
UsingReaders that can be interpreted directly on the machine state  improves  somewhat  on  the  approach  of  Myreen  [21,  Ap- pendix A], in which the operational semantics always fetches 20 bytes from memory and checks for overflow only after decoding.
Instruction  execution.Instruction  execution  makes  significant use of the state monad for reading and writing registers, flags and memory.  Through  careful  use  of  auxiliary  definitions  to  capture commonality,  our  formalization  is  small  and  easily  understood.
Here is the interpretation of theRETinstruction.
| RETOP offset⇒ let! oldSP = getRegFromProcState ESP; let! IP’ = getDWORDFromProcState oldSP; do! setRegInProcState ESP (addB (oldSP+#4) (zeroExtend 16 offset)); setRegInProcState EIP IP’ Putting it together.Given a machine state, the processor (a) de- codes the bytes addressed by EIP to determine which instruction to execute; (b) advances EIP to the next instruction; and (c) exe- cutes the instruction. All this is captured by the following single- step transition function, written in monadic style.
Definition step : ST unit := let! oldIP = getRegFromProcState EIP; let! (instr,newIP) = readFromProcState oldIP; do! setRegInProcState EIP newIP; evalInstr instr.
In addition to state, the processor monad incorporates excep- tional  behaviour  which  is  used  for  actual  processor  exceptions such as division-by-zero and memory violations, but is also used to  model  unspecified  behaviour.  For  example,  the  x86  specifi- cation  states  that  flagsSFandPFareundefinedafter  executing theMULinstruction. We model this using an additional flag state FlagUnspecified,  which  if  later  scrutinized  by  a  conditional branch instruction is interpreted as undefined behaviour, modelled byevalInstrreturning theNonevalue.
3.  Assembling x86 A particular emphasis of our work on machine code verification is on using Coq as a place to do everything: modelling the machine, writing programs, assembling or compiling programs, and proving properties of programs. Coq’s powerful notation feature makes it possible  to  write  assembly  programs,  and  higher-level  language programs, inside Coq itself with no need for external tools.
3.1  Basics of assembly code Syntax.At  its  most  superficial,  assembly  code  support  means nice  syntax  for  theInstrtype,  which  is  achieved  using  Coq’s NotationandCoercionfeatures.  For  example,  the  instruction ADD EAX, [EBX + ECX*4 + 14]considered earlier is valid syn- tax both in our Coq development and in real-world assemblers that make use of Intel-style syntax for x86.
Labels.An important aspect of assembly programs is the ability to  define  and  reference  namedlabels.  To  this  end  we  define  a typeprogramto represent sequences of instructions, label scoping, label definition, and inline data: Inductive program := prog_instr (c: Instr) | prog_skip | prog_seq (p1 p2: program) | prog_declabel (body: DWORD→program) | prog_label (l: DWORD) | prog_data {T} {R: Reader T} {W: Writer T} (RT: Roundtrip R W) (v: T).
Coercion prog_instr: Instrprogram.
Infix ";;" := prog_seq (at level 62, right associativity).
Notation "’LOCAL’ l ’;’ p" := (prog_declabel (fun l⇒p)) (at level 65, l ident, right associativity).
Notation "l ’:;’" := (prog_label l) (at level 8, no associativity, format "l ’:;’").
The first three constructors just give us possibly-empty instruction sequences. Theprog_declabelconstructor andLOCALnotation introduces a new label namel, scoped withinp. This use of Coq variables for object-level ‘variables’ (here, labels) is reminiscent of higher-order  abstract  syntax.  Theprog_labelconstructor  (with familiar colon notation) is a pseudo-instruction whose address the assembler will assign to the label.
Here is an example of using labels to define a simple ‘skip over’ conditional: (* Determine max(r1,r2), leaving result in r1 *) Definition max (r1 r2: Reg) : program := LOCAL Bigger; CMP r1, r2;; JG Bigger;; MOV r1, r2;; Bigger:; .
The final constructorprog_datapacks a value together with round-tripping reader and writer; we can use this to define handy inline  data  directives,  as  used  in  the  example  of  Figure  1.  The ability of readers and writers to observe their current ‘cursor’ lets us 
define alignment directives similar to those supported by traditional assemblers: Example exalign := LOCAL str; LOCAL num; str:;; ds "Characters";; num:;; align 2;; (* Align on 2^2 boundary i.e. DWORD *) dd #x"87654321". (* DWORD value *) The assembler.To turn aprograminto a sequence of bytes suit- able  for  execution,  we  must  do  two  things:  assign  concrete  ad- dresses  toprog_declabel-bound  variables,  and  encode  the  in- structions themselves.
For encoding, we create an instance ofWriterfor instructions, with various helper instances for auxiliary types used in instruc- tions. Here is the fragment that deals with three variants ofpush: Instance encodeInstr : Writer Instr := fun instr⇒ match instr with | PUSH (SrcI c)⇒ if signTruncate 24 (n:=7) c is Some b then do! writeNext #x"6A"; writeNext b else do! writeNext #x"68"; writeNext c | PUSH (SrcR r)⇒ writeNext (PUSHPREF ## injReg r) | PUSH (SrcM src)⇒ do! writeNext #x"FF"; writeNext (#6, RegMemM true src) As the reader will observe,writeNextis overloaded: in the first case, it is used to write aBYTEand then aDWORD, in the second case,  we  concatenate  a  constant  prefix  of  five  bits  onto  a  three- bit encoding of registers, and in the third case, we use aWriter instance for the x86r/m32addressing mode.
For label resolution, we use the classic two-pass approach. On the first pass overprogram, we instantiate eachprog_declabel with  a  freshDWORDthat  uniquely  identifies  the  label,  encode instructions  only  to  obtain  their  size,  and  update  a  map  from label  declaration  identifiers  to  addresses  when  encountering  a prog_label. On the second pass, we instantiateprog_declabel with  the  calculated  addresses  and  accumulate  instruction  encod- ings. Our current scheme assumes that label occurrences (for ex- ample, in branches) have fixed length encodings – a scheme that used more  efficient  variable-length encodings would iterate  until label assignments reach a fixed point [5].
The assembler is packaged up as aWriter programthat com- bines the passes in a clean monadic style, withrunWriterused to compute the final sequence of generated bytes.
The  assembler  will  fail  if  the  instructions  run  off  the  end  of memory or if the program uses labels in an ill-formed manner such as placing the same label twice.
Assembler  correctness.No  discussion  of  an  assembler  con- structed within a proof assistant would be complete without some discussion ofproof; and indeed, we have proved that the assembler does its job. First, we can prove that instruction encoding commutes with instruction decoding: Instance RoundtripInstr : Roundtrip readInstr encodeInstr.
The correctness of the assembler itself is not aRoundtripinstance since there is noReader program. There is instead an interpreta- tion ofprograminto separation logic [16],interpProgram, and we can prove correctness relative to this: Theorem write_program_correct (i j: DWORD) (p: program): interpWriter i j p`interpProgram i j p.
This theorem is analogous to theinterpWriter_roundtrip lemma  from  the  end  of  Section  2.4:  a  program  after  assembly corresponds to its own logical interpretation.
Definition callproc f := LOCAL iret; MOV EDI, iret;; JMP f;; iret:;.
Definition defproc (p: program) := p;; JMP EDI.
Notation "’letproc’ f ’:=’ p ’in’ q" := (LOCAL skip; LOCAL f; JMP skip;; f:;;   defproc p;; skip:;; q) (at level 65, f ident, right associativity).
(* Multiply EAX by nine, trashing EBX *) Example ex := letproc tripleEAX := MOV EBX, EAX;; SHL EAX, 2;; ADD EAX, EBX in callproc tripleEAX;; callproc tripleEAX.
Figure 5.Example: procedure macros 3.2  Macros A feature of most assemblers – though perhaps little used, now that most assembly code is machine-produced – is the provision of both built-in and programmer-definedmacros.
Structured  control.Built-in  macros  are  used,  for  example,  to build  conditionals  and  loops  without  going  through  the  pain  of declaring labels and branching. In Coq, simple definitions, together with scoped labels and judicious use of notation, make this very easy. Here, for example, is a conditional construct that tests whether flags according to condition codecondhave boolean valuevalue, and executespthenorpelseaccordingly.
Definition ifthenelse (cond: Condition) (value: bool) (pthen pelse: program) : program := LOCAL THEN; LOCAL END; JCC cond value THEN;; pelse;; JMP END;; THEN:;; pthen;; END:;.
A while-loop can be defined similarly, this time incorporating test codeptestthat sets the flags appropriately. (See Figure 1 for an example of its use.) Definition while (ptest: program) (cond: Condition) (value: bool) (pbody: program) : program := LOCAL BODY; LOCAL test; JMP test;; BODY:;; pbody;; test:;; ptest;; JCC cond value BODY.
Such definitions really shine when proving correctness of machine code programs using our separation logic framework [16], as we can give derived Hoare-style proof rules for the macros.
Procedures.We can also devise macros to package up procedures and their calling conventions. For example, Figure 5 codes a non- standard  ‘leaf’  calling  convention  in  which  the  return  address  is simply stored in the registerEDI, together with some notation for locally-scoped procedure declarations. Earlier we saw an applica- tion of this in the factorial example of Figure 1. We consider this further in Section 4.2.
 4.  More substantial examples 4.1  Multiplication by a constant Using Coq definitions, possibly involving recursion, we can write macros that are akin to the instruction selection phase of a com- piler. For example, the function below generates shift and addition instructions to computer 1 :=r 1 +r 2 ·mfor some constantm.
(In  the  good  old  days,  this  would  have  been  more  efficient  than using the processor’s own multiplication instruction. Alas, this is probably no longer the case, but hopefully it illustrates the power of macros.) Fixpoint add_mulc nbits (r1 r2: Reg) (m: nat) := if nbits is nbits’.+1 then if odd m then ADD r1, r2;; SHL r2, 1;; add_mulc nbits’ r1 r2 m./2 else SHL r2, 1;; add_mulc nbits’ r1 r2 m./2 else prog_skip.
Of course, one could imagine doing something similar in a high- level language such as Haskell. The crucial difference is that we can also state and prove correctness of a specification for the macro: Lemma add_mulcCorrect nbits :∀(r1 r2: Reg) m, m < 2^nbits→ ` ∀v,∀w, basic (r17_v ** r27_w ** OSZCP_Any) (add_mulc nbits r1 r2 m) (r17_addB v (mulB w (fromNat m)) ** r2? ** OSZCP_Any).
The  syntax  following`is  an  expression  in  our  specification logic  [16].  It  states  thatadd_mulc bits nbits r1 r2 mbe- haves  as  a  block  of  code  with  single  entry  and  exit  points,  and can be specified by abasicHoare-style triple, whose precondition gives initial valuesvandwfor registersr1andr2, assumes that the five standard flags have arbitrary values, and whose postcondition assigns the appropriate result to registerr1and says nothing about r2and the flags. Notice the use of separating conjunction, written as**; in this specification it serves merely to ensure thatr1andr2 are distinct.
Having proved a crisp specification foradd_mulcwe can use it from within subsequent code and their proofs of correctness just as if there existed a special add-and-multiply instruction.
More complex and cunning use of x86 instructions can be en- capsulated in such definitions. So, for example, the macro instanti- ation add_mulcFast EDI EDX #160 reduces to SHL EDX, 5;; ADD EDI, EDX;; LEA EDI, [EDI + EDX * 4 + 0] that  uses  x86  address  arithmetic  in  addition  to  a  shift  operation.
The specification ofadd_mulcFastis identical to that of the less efficientadd_mulc.
4.2  Calling conventions To some extent it’s possible to hide details of calling conventions using macros: we already saw an example of this in Figure 1, where the calling sequence for a three-argumentcdeclfunction call was packaged up as a Coq definition. More interestingly, we cangen- eratecaller and callee boilerplate code, and its specification, from descriptions of calling conventions.
We consider three standard x86 calling conventions, described using an enumeration type: Inductive CallConv := cdecl | stdcall | fastcall.
We  then  write  a  functioncallconvthat  takes  takes  a  calling convention  and  arity,  and  returns  a  pair(call, def)in  which callis a pseudo-instruction that expands to the calling sequence for  that  convention  and  number  of  arguments,  anddefwraps  a function body with appropriate prologue and epilogue, and supplies argument accessors. The type ofcallconvis mildly dependent, in that the types ofcallanddefvary according to the specified arity.
Here it is used to define and call a function that computes the sum of its three arguments: Example addfun (cc: CallConv) := let (call, def) := callconv cc (mkFunSig 3 true) in LOCAL MyFunc; MyFunc:;; def (fun arg1 arg2 arg3⇒ MOV EAX, arg1;; ADD EAX, arg2;; ADD EAX, arg3);; call MyFunc 2 3 4.
Let’s see what happens when we instantiateaddfunwith the three  standard  calling  conventions.  First,  withcdecl,  in  which arguments are passed on the stack, right-to-left, and the caller has to clean up the stack: LOCAL MyFunc; MyFunc:;; PUSH EBP;; MOV EBP, ESP;; (* prologue *) MOV EAX, [EBP + 8];; ADD EAX, [EBP + 12];; ADD EAX, [EBP + 16];; POP EBP;; RET 0;;      (* epilogue *) PUSH 4;; PUSH 3;; PUSH 2;; CALL MyFunc;; ADD ESP, 12 Second, withstdcall, in which arguments are again passed on the stack, right-to-left, but the callee cleans up the stack: LOCAL MyFunc; MyFunc:;; PUSH EBP;; MOV EBP, ESP;; (* prologue *) MOV EAX, [EBP + 8];; ADD EAX, [EBP + 12];; ADD EAX, [EBP + 16];; POP EBP;; RET 12;;      (* epilogue *) PUSH 4;; PUSH 3;; PUSH 2;; CALL MyFunc Lastly, withfastcall, in which the first two arguments are passed in registersECXandEDX: LOCAL MyFunc; MyFunc:;; PUSH EBP;; MOV EBP, ESP;; MOV EAX, ECX;; ADD EAX, EDX;; ADD EAX, [EBP + 8];; POP EBP;; RET 4;; PUSH 4;; MOV ECX, 2;; MOV EDX, 3;; CALL MyFunc.
Compared to earlier work on formalization of calling conven- tions [22], the potential of a proof assistant such as Coq is in gener- atingspecificationsfrom calling convention descriptions. We hope to develop this idea further, even using thetypesin C-style signa- tures to generate more precise specifications for calls to external libraries whose implementation is not under our control.
 4.3  Regular expressions Writing  large  amounts  of  raw  assembly  code  is  tedious  and  dif- ficult, and verifying it even more so. To produce non-trivial pro- grams, we clearly want to move up the abstraction stack for both programming  and  proving  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  kind  of macros we have shown so far take the first step in that direction; the next is to implement more self-contained domain-specific lan- guages.
Coq, and dependently-typed languages in general, offer an ideal environment for embedding domain-specific languages (DSLs) [6, 9,  23].  Dependent  types  support  the  type-safe  embedding  of  ob- ject languages [4] and Coq’s mixfix notation system enables rea- sonably idiomatic domain-specific concrete syntax. The assembler, and Coq’s powerful abstraction facilities, potentially provide a flex- ible framework in which to not only implement and verify a range ofdomain-specific compilers[12, 24], but also to combine them, and reason about their combination. Working with many DSLs op- timizes the “horizontal” compositionality of systems, and favours reuse of building blocks, by contrast with the “vertical” composi- tion of the traditional compiler pipeline, involving a stack of com- paratively large intermediate languages that are harder to reuse the higher one goes.
The idea of building compilers from reusable building blocks is  a  common  one,  of  course.  But  the  interface  contracts  of  such blocks tend to be complex, so combinations are hard to get right.
We believe that being able to write and verify formal specifications for  the  pieces  will  make  it  possible  to  know  when  components can  be  combined,  and  should  help  in  designing  good  interfaces.
Furthermore,  the  fact  that  Coq  is  also  a  system  for  formalizing mathematics  enables  one  to  establish  a  close,  formal  connection between embedded DSLs and non-trivial domain-specificmodels.
The  possibility  of  developing  software  in  atruly‘model-driven’ way is an exciting one.
As a small example, we present in this section a certified com- piler from regular expressions to x86 machine code. We make cru- cial use an existing Coq formalization, due to Braibant and Pous [7], of the theory of Kleene algebras. We do not merely use the the- ory developed in that library to prove correctness of our little com- piler, but actually reuse the Coq-executable translation from regu- lar expressions to deterministic finite-state automata (DFAs) that is part of their formalization. We write and certify a compiler from DFAs to machine code, which composes with the library’s certified translation to yield a verified compiler for regular languages. That this works despite the fact that the Kleene algebra formalization was developed with no thought of implementation is a nice illustra- tion of the power of constructive mathematics.
We later apply the resulting pipeline to recognize strings rep- resenting floating-point numbers. One could certainly write such a particular validator in assembly. However, proving the correctness of a special instance is likely to be as laborious as proving the cor- rectness of the more generally useful regular expression compiler.
DFAs:We generate machine code from DFAs, which have the following components: Variables (alphabet: list DWORD) (dfa_size : nat) (dfa_init: dfa_state) (trans: dfa_state→DWORD→dfa_state) (accept: dfa_state→bool).
wheredfa_stateis’I_dfa_size, the SSREFLECTfinite type of naturals less thandfa_size, andalphabetspecifies the allowable subset ofDWORD. The initial state of the automaton isdfa_init while the accepting states are specified byaccept. The transition function is coded bytrans.
Definition transition : program := (tnth labels s):;; (* Move pointer to next character *) MOV EBX, [EAX] ;; ADD EAX, (#4 : DWORD) ;; (* Accept/reject if end of string: *) CMP EBX, (#0: DWORD) ;; JE (if accept s then acc else rej);; (* Jump table: *) foldr prog_seq prog_skip [seq CMP EBX, (c: DWORD) ;; JE (tnth labels (trans s c)) | c <- alphabet] ;; (* Not in alphabet: *) JMP rej.
Figure 6.Compilation of a transition The language accepted by a DFA is defined inductively over an input word, i.e. a list ofDWORDs: Fixpoint lang (s: dfa_state) (w: seq DWORD): bool := if w is a::w’ then (a \in alphabet) && lang (trans s a) w’ else accept s.
We say that the wordwis accepted by the automaton if lang dfainitw≡true Compiling DFAs:From a DFA we generate code that processes a 0-terminated string ofDWORDs, stored in memory at some address buffer. In our logic, we writebuffer :->0 w, forwa sequence of non-null double words, for this precondition. The compiler cre- ates a tuple of assembler labels labels : dfa_size.-tuple DWORD that are in one-to-one correspondence with the states of the automa- ton. Each label corresponds to the entry-point of the transition func- tion at that state; the label associated with a DFA statesis obtained by the tuple-lookup[tnth labels s].
The key component of code generation is the compilation of the transition function at a single states. Besides potentially jumping to the labels associated with other states, each transition function can take two possible “continuations”: it can either jump to address accto accept a word, or to addressrejto reject a word.
Compiling a transition:The compilation of a transition is pre- sented in Figure 6.EAXpoints to a symbol, initially the first ele- ment of the buffer. If the current character is the terminating sym- bol0, we take the accepting or rejecting continuation, depending on whether the current state is accepting or not. Note that meta- programming is at play here: theifstatement is evaluated in Coq, at compile time.
If  the  current  character  is  non-zero,  it  is  processed  through  a sequence of conditional branches: if any character of the alphabet matches, the code jumps to the appropriate state label according to the DFA’s transition function. Again, the jump table is computed in Coq. If we reach the end of the jump table, the character in memory is not in the alphabet so the word is rejected. The resulting code is  therefore  a  rather  direct  assembler  translation  of  the  function trans s.
Compiling the DFA:The code for the whole DFA is obtained by iterating over all states, concatenating the compiled version of the 
Lemma DFA_to_x86_correct (w: seq DWORD) : ` ∀l, (   (safe⊗(lang dfa_init w ∧EIP7_acc)⊗EAX?) ∧(safe⊗(¬lang dfa_init w ∧EIP7_rej)⊗EAX?) (* ----------------------------------*) −→safe⊗EIP7_l⊗EAX7_buffer ) (* Memory: *) ⊗EBX?
⊗buffer7→ 0 w (* Program: *) l7→DFA_to_x86.
Figure 7.Correctness of the DFA compiler individual transition functions. Because each snippet generated by transition sstarts with the labels, the assembler will resolve these  names  automatically  to  the  desired  addresses.  To  start  the automaton, we simply jump to the initial state: Definition DFA_to_x86: program := JMP (tnth labels dfa_init);; foldr prog_seq prog_skip [tuple transition labels s | s < dfa_size].
Generating the DFA:Braibant and Pous’s ATBR library [7] ex- ports a datatyperegexof regular expressions, with constructors for the empty set, the empty word, literals, concatenation, and star operators. They also define their own typeDFA.tof DFAs, operat- ing over sequences of Coq’spositives and acomputablefunction from regular expressions to their automata: Definition X_to_DFA (a: regex): DFA.t := (...) Given a regexr, we construct the components of one of our DFAs fromX_to_DFA r; this is morally the identity, but for the transla- tion from non-zeroDWORDs topositive. ApplyingDFA_to_x86 to these components,buffer,accandrejthen yields an x86 pro- gram that recognizes the original regular expression.
Correctness of DFA compilation:The correctness of DFA com- pilation follows naturally from the close correspondence between execution of the source DFA and the target code. Where the DFA takes a transition from one state to another upon recognizing a char- acter, the machine jumps to the associated label. Where the DFA ac- cepts or rejects a word based on the status of the final state, the ma- chine jumps toaccorrej, the choice of which depends on whether the state is accepting or not.
The  formal  statement  of  the  correctness  of  DFA  compilation is shown in Figure 7. The generated code is unstructured, being a mutually-recursive collection of blocks, each of which can call the others or jump out to either of the exit labelsaccandrej. The traditional Hoare-triple expressed bybasic, which only allows for a single precondition and a single postcondition, is not therefore appropriate. We instead use a more primitive continuation-passing style of specification [2, 16, 26]:ifit is safe to jump to the two exits (EIP7_accandEIP7_rej, with appropriate conditions holding), thenit  is  safe  to  jump  to  the  entry  point  of  the  compiled  code (EIP7_l).
We  work  under  a  ‘read-only’  frame  [16],  which  specifies  the preservation  of  the  program  code  located  at  addressl,  and  two frames,  the  first  stating  the  existence  of  theEBXflag  and  an- other  stating  the  existence  of  a  null-terminated  stringwat  ad- dressbuffer.  In  this  context,  it  is  safe  to  execute  the  code at  addresslwithEAXpointing  to  the  buffer  –  expressed  by safe⊗EIP7_l⊗EAX7_buffer– provided that: • it is safe to take the continuationacc, formally safe⊗(. . .)∧EIP7_acc when the word in memory is accepted by the DFA, formally lang dfainitw • it is safe to take the continuationrej, formally safe⊗(. . .)∧EIP7_rej when the word in memory isnotaccepted by the DFA, formally ¬(lang dfa initw) That is, the x86 code takes the success (respectively, failure) con- tinuation if and only if the DFA accepts (respectively, rejects) the wordw. Note that we only enforcepartialcorrectness: the infinite loop is a valid implementation of this specification.
The  correctness  proof  for  the  compiler  relies  on  a  Beki ˇ c-like lemma that uses the L  ̈ ob rule to establish safety for sets of mutu- ally recursive code fragments. We proved the specification by first showing simple memory safety and then straightforwardly extend- ing  the  specifications  with  the  logical  invariants  concerning  lan- guage acceptance. Note that this specification requires the original string to be preserved in memory, as the computation is framed un- der the buffer containingw. A small modification yields a version that would also be satisfied by an implementation that read the data destructively.
Correctness  of  regular  expression  compilation:Braibant  and Pous prove [7] three results that together imply that the language accepted by a regular expressionrand the language accepted by theDFA.t(X_to_DFA r) coincide: Lemma X_to_DFA_correct: ∀a, DFA.eval (X_to_DFA a) == a.
Lemma X_to_DFA_bounded:∀a, DFA.bounded (X_to_DFA a).
Theorem language_DFA_eval:∀A, DFA.bounded A→ regex_language (DFA.eval A) == DFA_language A.
Composing these results with a lemma stating thatlang dfa_init coincides  with  theirDFA_language (X_to_DFA r)(on  strings fromalphabet), we can rewrite the correctness theorem of Fig- ure 7 using the following equivalence, forwa sequence ofDWORDs containing no zeros: lang dfa_init w↔ regex_language r (map char_of_DWORD w) ∧(all (fun a⇒a \in alphabet) w).
to get a fully verified pipeline for regular expression compilation.
Further, the specification is then compatible with the rest of ATBR, potentially allowing more complex language-theoretic results about the behaviour of the code to be derived.
Matching floating-point numbers:As a small test, we exercised our pipeline on the following regular expression Definition FP: regex := [[ "-" , "+"]]? ’ [{ "0" , "9" }]* ’ $"." ? ’ [{ "0" , "9" }]+ ’ ($"e" ’ [[ "-" , "+"]]? ’ [{ "0" , "9" }]+)?.
 that recognizes strings representing signed floating-point numbers.
Note  the  use  of  Coq  notation  to  provide  an  intuitive  syntax  for defining regular expressions.
The intermediate DFA consists of 12 states over an alphabet of 14  letters.  This  results  in  2321  bytes  of  machine  code.  We  have packaged this code into an executable that retrieves a string from the standard input (through a system call togets), run the DFA on that string, and reports its status through theputssystem call.
Adding the (currently unverified) wrapper yields a 4K-byte binary.
5.  Discussion and related work There is a long tradition of using proof assistants to formalize pro- cessors and verify low-level programs. Notable early work includes the verification in the Boyer-Moore prover of the the Piton assem- bler for the verified FM8502/9001 microprocessors [18]. For rea- sons  of  space,  we  here  discuss  just  a  few  more  recent  pieces  of related work.
Tuch  et  al.  [28]  describe  an  Isabelle/HOL  formalization  in which a C-language view of memory as a collection of typed ob- jects  is  layered  over  an  underlying  total  map  from  addresses  to bytes. Isabelle’s type classes are used to infer the byte-encodings of different types and a ghost heap type description allows separa- tion between the representations of distinct types to be inferred and maintained  fairly  automatically.  A  further  separation  logic  layer is  used  to  deal  with  non-aliasing  between  values  of  the  same  C language type.
Mulligan and Sacerdoti Coen [20] have used Matita to formalize the MCS-51 microcontroller and the correctness of an assembler for it. The assembler uses pseudoinstructions for jumps to labels, which may be expanded into different kinds of branch in the object code. Correctness is then presented as a simulation between the op- erational semantics of object and assembly programs, but the result is conditional on the program (dynamically) not manipulating ad- dresses in ways judged to be ill-behaved (e.g. performing arithmetic on them), and on the correctness of the branch displacement deci- sions. Our assembler does not currently make branch decisions; we plan to address this at a slightly higher level of abstraction, giving a semantic (rather than syntactic) interpretation to a low-level type system distinguishing pointers from more concrete data.
The targets of the CompCert compiler [17] are comparatively high-level assembly languages for PowerPC, ARM and x86. The operational semantics of these assembly languages are defined over a C-like memory model (rather than the lower-level array of bytes view  we  take  here),  and  there  are  pseudoinstructions  for  label, allocation and stack operations. CompCert’s treatment of machine integers is less pervasively dependent than ours, exploiting Coq’s module system to provide operations on integers of particular sizes, and using Coq’s arbitrary precision integers, together with proofs that they are within a certain range, rather than raw sequences of bits.
RockSalt [19] is a verified checker for the sandboxing policy used  in  Google’s  Native  Client.  The  verification  of  RockSalt  re- lies on a Coq model of x86, built using two domain specific lan- guages. One is a regular expression parser, used to decode bitstrings in memory into an inductive datatype of x86 instructions. The ab- straction provided by this DSL is similar to that of our reader mon- ads, though non-determinism in the grammars makes establishing the determinism of decoding somewhat involved. The second DSL is a register transfer language, used to define the transition function for decoded instructions, which plays a similar role to the impera- tive monadic language we use for the same purpose. Our embed- dings are shallow, however, whilst those used in RockSalt are deep (i.e. there are inductive datatypes for both grammars and RTL in- structions). RockSalt uses CompCert’s libraries for machine inte- gers.
Chlipala  has  built  a  model  of  x86  in  Coq  for  the  purpose  of verifying OCaml-extractable verifiers for machine code [8]. In this work, the Coq functions work on an assembly-level type of instruc- tions,  with  binary  decoding  being  delegated  to  an  OCaml  func- tion.  His  Bedrock  framework  [10]  for  programming  and  verify- ing (with an impressive degree of automation) low-level programs works with a rather idealized assembly language. Like our system, Bedrock makes  good  use of  Coq’s customizable  syntax to  allow low-level programs to be written in a convenient way within the proof assistant, including user-defined macros. Bedrock’s program syntax also embeds pre- and post-conditions and hints to the proof automation.
Fox and Myreen have formalized the ARMv7 ISA in HOL4 [13].
This is an unusually comprehensive formalization, presented in a monadic style somewhat like ours, and has been subjected to test- ing against real hardware. Myreen has also built a model of x86 machine  code  and  used  it  to  verify  a  JIT  compiler  for  a  simple language [21]. This model is notable for carefully modelling the x86 instruction cache and treating both encoding and decoding of instructions.
There are many similarities between these projects and the work described here, but none have our focus on making it convenient to write, compile and verify the code that actually runs, relative to a model of the underlying hardware, entirely within one system.
This paper has focused mainly on the modelling and program- ming aspects, as our earlier paper [16] describes the program logic in some detail. Many features of Coq on which we rely for these first  two  tasks  have  analogues  in  other  systems.  Haskell  and  Is- abelle both feature type classes and, whilst not dependently typed, can simulate some of our uses of dependency (e.g. using type-level naturals  to  express  n-bit  words),  and  the  use  of  HOAS  for  rep- resenting  object  level  binding  is  common  in  DSLs  embedded  in functional languages. Full dependent types are more powerful and straightforward than clever encodings in Haskell (and we use them extensively), but the main advantage of Coq is certainly the close integration with verification. We believe that such tight integration may partially compensate for the fact that languages embedded in a system like Coq will inevitably be more ‘clunky’ than ones with their own custom parser, type checker, error messages and so on.
For  producing  trustworthy  software,  proof  assistants  are  the only  tools  in  whichallthe  artefacts  in  which  we  are  interested (programs, languages, models, specifications, proofs, . . . ) can co- exist and be formally related. Modern software components are of- ten comparatively small and specialized, but must meet specifica- tions that are inherently rather rich, in that they involve non-trivial mathematical structures that cannot be directly expressed and rea- soned about in the logics of traditional verification tools. A fully integrated approach suggests that one could construct systems with strong correctness guarantees by combining verified components written  in  several  domain-specific  languages,  each  with  its  own domain-specific metatheory. Our regular expression compiler pro- vides a simple example of how a piece of formalized mathematics (not originally designed for use in generating or proving machine code) can be used in verification; some other compiler correctness results have a similar flavour [3, 21]. Of course, just having all the components programmed in one metalanguage does not magically make them compatible, but having them accompanied by specifica- tions makes it possible to both say what compatibility means, and to prove properties of combined systems in the case that the com- ponentsarecompatible.
Promising though such ideas are, the combination of Coq, Proof General and Emacs is, we must admit, still some way from being the multilanguage integrated development and verification environ- ment of our dreams. Predictable things we would like include better techniques for dealing with object language binding and integration 
with external solvers (though we could certainly do much more in terms of automation entirely within Coq). Nor has our experience with doing all computation within Coq itself been entirely trouble- free. Though this is intellectually appealing and (arguably) reduces the TCB, computation within Coq is inherently less efficient than extracting and compiling to native code, internal terms can be large, and additional time and space is used reducing non-computational parts of them. More critically, it is all too easy to make definitions that do not compute at all; this is a common problem when using the SSREFLECTlibraries, which use opaque definitions to improve efficiency of proving. Avoiding such issues, particularly when us- ing third-party libraries, still feels like something of a black art. It remains to be seen to what extent our current approach to compu- tation can really scale, but Coq continues to improve in this regard, and we always have the option of extraction to fall back on.
Finally, we note an interesting phenomenon. The requirements of  verification  tend  to  push  us  towards  writing  even  small  frag- ments of assembly code in a surprisingly abstracted, modular style.
For example, a single increment instruction used to step through a string is naturally abstracted as the ‘next’ function of a much more generic abstract iterator interface, just because that’s the best way to structure the associated proof. On the one hand, such refactor- ings  feel  like  good  software  engineering  and  really  do  make  the surrounding verified code usefully more generic; on the other, they do make programs very ‘bitty’, as one rarely writes more than a handful of instructions without wanting to abstract something one would not (or possibly could not) have abstracted without the re- quirements (or possibility) of verification. Whether this should be counted as a benefit or drawback of our approach, we are as yet undecided.
References [1]  B. Aydemir, A. Bohannon, M. Fairbairn, J. Foster, B. Pierce, P. Sewell, D. Vytiniotis, G. Washburn, S. Weirich, and S. Zdancewic.   Mecha- nized metatheory for the masses: The POPLmark challenge.  In18th International Conference on Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics (TPHOLs), volume 3603 ofLNCS. Springer, 2005.
[2]  N. Benton.   A typed, compositional logic for a stack-based abstract machine.  In3rd Asian Symposium on Programming Languages and Systems (APLAS), volume 3780 ofLNCS, 2005.
[3]  N. Benton and C.-K. Hur. Biorthogonality, step-indexing and compiler correctness.    In14th  ACM  SIGPLAN  International  Conference  on Functional Programming (ICFP). ACM, 2009.
[4]  N. Benton, C-K. Hur, A. J. Kennedy, and C. McBride. Strongly typed term representations in Coq.J. Automated Reasoning, 49, 2011.
[5]  J. Boender and C. S. Coen.  On the correctness of a branch displace- ment algorithm.Preprint arXiv:1209.5920, 2012.
[6]  E.  Brady  and  K.  Hammond.    Resource-safe  systems  programming with  embedded  domain  specific  languages.In14th  International Symposium on Practical Aspects of Declarative Languages (PADL), volume 7149 ofLNCS. Springer, 2012.
[7]  T. Braibant and D. Pous.  An efficient Coq tactic for deciding Kleene algebras.    In1st  International  Conference  on  Interactive  Theorem Proving (ITP), volume 6172 ofLNCS. Springer, 2010.
[8]  A. Chlipala.  Modular development of certified program verifiers with a proof assistant.J. Functional Programming, 18(5/6), 2008.
[9]  A.  Chlipala.   Ur:  statically-typed  metaprogramming  with  type-level record computation. In31st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Program- ming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI). ACM, 2010.
[10]  A.  Chlipala.    Mostly-automated  verification  of  low-level  programs in computational separation logic.   In32nd ACM SIGPLAN Confer- ence on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI).
ACM, 2011.
[11]  Intel  Corp.Intel  64  and  IA-32  Architectures  Software  Developer’s Manual. Volume 2 (2A, 2B & 2C): Instruction Set Reference, January 2013.
[12]  P.-E. Dagand, A. Baumann, and T. Roscoe. Filet-o-Fish: practical and dependable domain-specific languages for OS development.SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 43(4):35–39, 2010.
[13]  A. Fox and M. O. Myreen. A trustworthy monadic formalization of the ARMv7 instuction set architecture. In1st International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP), volume 6172 ofLNCS. Springer, 2010.
[14]  G.  Gonthier.   Advances  in  the  formalization  of  the  odd  order  theo- rem. In2nd International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP), volume 6898 ofLNCS. Springer, 2011.
[15]  G.  Gonthier,  A.  Mahboubi,  and  E.  Tassi.    A  small  scale  reflection extension for the Coq system. Technical Report 6455, INRIA, 2011.
[16]  J.  B.  Jensen,  N.  Benton,  and  A.  J.  Kennedy.   High-level  separation logic for low-level code. In40th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL). ACM, 2013.
[17]  X. Leroy. Formal verification of a realistic compiler.Comm. ACM, 52 (7):107–115, 2009.
[18]  J.  Strother  Moore.Piton:  A  Verified  Assembly-Level  Language.
Kluwer, 1996.
[19]  G. Morrisett, G. Tan, J. Tassarotti, J.B. Tristan, and E. Gan. Rocksalt: Better,  faster,  stronger  SFI  for  the  x86.In33rd  ACM  SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI). ACM, 2012.
[20]  D. P. Mulligan and C. Sacerdoti Coen.  On the correctness of an as- sembler for the MCS-51 microprocessor. In2nd International Confer- ence on Certified Programs and Proofs (CPP), volume 7679 ofLNCS.
Springer, 2012.
[21]  M.O. Myreen.   Verified just-in-time compiler on x86.   In37th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT  Symposium  on  Principles  of  Programming  Lan- guages (POPL). ACM, 2010.
[22]  R. Olinsky, C. Lindig, and N. Ramsey.  Staged allocation: A compo- sitional technique for specifying and implementing procedure calling conventions.  In33rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Princi- ples of Programming Languages (POPL). ACM, 2006.
[23]  N. Oury and W. Swierstra.  The power of pi.  In13th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP). ACM, 2008.
[24]  L. Pike, N. Wegmann, S. Niller, and A. Goodloe.  Experience report: a  do-it-yourself  high-assurance  compiler.    In17th  ACM  SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP). ACM, 2012.
[25]  B. Spitters and van der Weegen. E.  Type classes for mathematics in type theory.Math. Structures in Comp. Sci., 21:1–31, 2011.
[26]  G.  Tan  and  A.  W.  Appel.   A  compositional  logic  for  control  flow.
In7th International Conference on Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI), volume 3855 ofLNCS, 2006.
[27]  The Coq Development Team.The Coq Reference Manual, version 8.4, 2012. URLhttp://coq.inria.fr.
[28]  H.  Tuch,  G.  Klein,  and  M.  Norrish.Types,  bytes  and  separation logic.  In34th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL). ACM, 2007.